
Very Briefly Noted:

•  Mike Butcher: The TechCrunch Survey of Dutch Tech Hubs: Calling Delft, Eindhoven, Rotterdam, 
Utrecht&Gi 
<https://techcrunch.com/2021/04/29/the-techcrunch-survey-of-dutch-tech-hubs-calling-delft-
eindhoven-rotterdam-utrecht/>

• Patrick Iber: a€™ As someone who believes that our grading systems are deeply broken and has been 
experimenting and refining un-grading systemsa€!

<https://twitter.eom/PatrickIber/status/l 391777253852393476>

• George Pearkes: a€™ Free idea for Fed reporters: do a compare/contrast of how dovish the central 
bank is this recovery vs last using Mester as a proxya€!. Mester was an avowed hawk during liftoff 
last time,
and this time shea€™ s in lock-step with the more dovish governors. Ita€™ s fascinatinga€! 
<https://twitter.com/pearkes/status/1391764165845528580>

• Maria Konnikov: The Confidence Game: Why We Fall for Ita€\ Every Tzme<https://books .google 
.com/books?id=zdVhCAAAQBAJ>

•  Dean Baker: The Fighting Isna€™ t Over: Review of The Ten Year War, by Jonathan Cohn’. a€~To sum 
up the book I wanted Cohn to write, there was a lot of silliness in the debate around Obamacare, 
but the
programa€™ s benefits have actually been undersolda€! it is aa€! bigger fa€“king deal than most 
people recognize, even its supporters. I wish this book had done more to make that cleara€! 
<https://cepr.net/the-
fighting-isnt-over-review-of-the-ten-vear-war-by-ionathan-cohn/>

•  Jim Sleeper: What a€cePoliticsa€nDoes to History: The Saga of Henry Kissinger & George Shultza€™ 
s Right-Hand Man’. a€~A better admonition to conferencegoers would have been a€oeDe mortuis nil nisi
veritasd€CS€.\. a€oeHill was forced to resign from the Foreign Service after it became clear that 
he had concealed evidence of Shultza€™ s extensive knowledge of the Iran-Contra scandal from federal
agentsa€Da€! 
<https://www.salon.com/2021/05/08/what-pofitics-does-to-historv-the-saga-of-henry-kissinger-and-geor
ge-shultzs-right-hand-man/>

• Cory Doctorow: a€™#Pluralistic is my multi-channel publishing efforta€”a project to push the 
limits of #POSSE (post own site, share everywhere) that allows me to maintain control over my work 
while still
meeting my audience where they are, on platforms whose scale makes them hard to rely ona€! 
<https://pluralistic,net>

• Roy Edroso: d^~Ita€™ s like they speak a secret languageaC”one Ia€™ m not even sure their 
subscribers speak: The Washington Times: "NEWS ALERT: Americans eager for a€~revenge travela€™ 
battered
by speed bumps: Americans eager to travel are running into rising gas prices, ever-shifting travel 
rules, and a shortage of foreign workers who fill seasonal jobs at U.S. parks and resortsa€!

<https: //twitter .com/edroso/status/1391747125256630276/photo/1 >

Paragraphs:

Matt: The point for <strike>conservative populists</strike> neofascists is not and has never been 
to a€oedeliver good jobs to working-class peoplea€D. It is to deliver a dream of sociological 
dominance and eminence to
working class people of the Volk while entrenching and magnifying the current property 
distribution-based hierarchy of elite social power. Yes, it is good that you appeal to the better 
nature of Josh Hawleya€”it is a useful
lesson to others who watch you make such an appeal, and then see it go nowhere. But you should not 
expect success:

Matthew Yglesias: Conservative Populists Should Embrace Housing Deregulation’. a€~I want to try to 
pull out and convince everyone that reforming zoning is just gooda€! if you care about racial
justicea€! if youa€™re a yuppiea€! if youa€™re a free-market ideologuea€! if youa€™re a populist 
whoa€! wants to deliver good jobs to working-class peoplea€!. The one really clear idea
conservative populists have on economics is that if we got rid of the less-educated immigrants, it 
would help the less-educated natives. I dona€™t think that this is right, but wea€™re not going to
get  anywhere by insisting on disagreeing about that. What I hope restrictionists will concede, 
however, is that immigration restriction is not a sufficient answer to working-class economic

strugglesa€!

LINK: <https://www.slowboring.eom/p/populists-housing>

Here John Maynard Keynes provides his brief for High Geithnerism: the financiers and the CEOs have 
us by the plums, so we must do our best to appease them:

John Maynard Keynes (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest & Money. a€~Enterprise which 
depends on hopes stretching into the future benefits the communitya€!. Buta€!
reasonable calculation^! [must be] supplemented and supported by animal spirits, so that the 
thought of ultimate loss which often overtakes pioneers, as experience undoubtedly tells us and 
them, is
put asidea€!. This means, unfortunately, not only that slumps and depressions are exaggerated in 
degree, but that economic prosperity is excessively dependent on a political and social atmosphere
which is congenial to the average business man. If the fear of a Labour Government or a New Deal 
depresses enterprise, this need not be the resulta€! ofa€! calculation ora€! a plot with political
intent;a€”it is the mere consequence of upsetting the delicate balance of spontaneous optimisma€!. 
We must have regarda€! to the nerves and hysteria and even the digestionsa€! of those upon whose
spontaneous activity it largely dependsa€!


get anywhere by insisting on disagreeing about that. What I hope restrictionists will concede, 
however, is that immigration restriction is not a sufficient answer to working-class economic

strugglesa€!

LINK: <https ://www.slowboring.com/p/populists-housing>

Here John Maynard Keynes provides his brief for High Geithnerism: the financiers and the CEOs have 
us by the plums, so we must do our best to appease them:

John Maynard Keynes (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest & Money. a€~Enterprise which 
depends on hopes stretching into the future benefits the communitya€!. Buta€!
reasonable calculation^! [must be] supplemented and supported by animal spirits, so that the 
thought of ultimate loss which often overtakes pioneers, as experience undoubtedly tells us and 
them, is
put asidea€!. This means, unfortunately, not only that slumps and depressions are exaggerated in 
degree, but that economic prosperity is excessively dependent on a political and social atmosphere
which is congenial to the average business man. If the fear of a Labour Government or a New Deal 
depresses enterprise, this need not be the resulta€! ofa€! calculation ora€! a plot with political
intent;a€”it is the mere consequence of upsetting the delicate balance of spontaneous optimisma€!. 
We must have regarda€! to the nerves and hysteria and even the digestionsa€! of those upon whose
spontaneous activity it largely dependsa€!

LINK: <https://cruel .org/econthought/texts/generaltheory/chap 12 ,html>

This is a fascinating perspective on what Liz Cheney is trying to do:

Yastreblanky: Maybe Shea€™ s Just Smarter than Kevin: a€~An interesting claima€!. Liz Cheney seems 
to think there is evidence she has the politics right, and party managementa€! hide[s] the
evidence from members: a€oeWhen staff from the NRCCa€! explained] thea€! latest polling ina€! 
battleground [s]a€! they left out a key finding about Trumpa€™ s weaknessa€!. Trumpa€™ s
unfavorable ratings were 15 points higher than his favorable ones in the core districtsa€!. Cheney 
was alarmeda€! because Republican campaign officials had also left out bad Trump polling news at a
March retreata€!a€D. The districtsa€! would bea€! ones that came out particularly close in 2020, or 
that Republicans flippeda€l. Trump hateda€! [and] President Biden is very populara€!.

Cheneya€™ s calculation is a€! that the party doesna€™ t have a chance of winning the House unless 
individual members are allowed to detach themselves from Trumpa€! while the safe Republican
seats will remain safea€!. Ita€™ s reassuring toa€! think of Cheney not as some kind of 
unexpectedly noble martyra€! but merely smarter than McCarthya€!. Fear rules among Republicans,
McCarthy especially, and probably some kind of PTSD (Post-Trumpatic Stress Disorder) from which it 
will take them time to recover. She may be right, technically, but ita€™ s not going to do her
much gooda€!

LINK: <https://nomoremister.blogspot.com/2021/Q5/maybe-shes-iust-smarter-than-kevin.html>

<https ://braddelong .substack .com/p/briefl y-noted-for-2021-05-10-mo>

