Subscribe now

KPMG           lixa Bank ZF

N2PE: Gillian Tett (@gilliantett) Discusses Her New Book a€oeAnthro-Vision: A New Way to See in 
Business & Lifea€E2 Amid severe digital disruption, economic upheaval, and political flux, how can 
we make sense of the world? Leaders today typically look for answers in economic models, Big Data, 
or artificial intelligence platforms. Gillian Tett will discuss her new book that points to
anthropology a€’’the study of human culture. Anthropologists learn to get inside the minds of other 
people, helping them not only to understand other cultures but also to appraise their own 
environment with fresh perspective as an insider-outsider, gaining lateral vision. Moderated by 
Brad DeLong (@delong) with Comments from Julia Sizek (@ JuliaS izek). RSVP for Zoom Link:

<https://t.co/D7ibqQlKL4 https://t.co/BO2v3Tk37v> <https 
://twitter.com/N2PENetwork/status/l461061581685460998>
Share

My Proposed Intro: One of the cheesier and more adolescent of the sub-genres of science fiction I 
must admit I still read what is one in which some plucky human hero is confronted with an anthology 
intelligence: millions of organisms, each of them small and mindless on its own, yet somehow adding 
up to a human or more than human intelligence with Ailien and hard-to-understand belief
and purposes.

But it is we humans who, looked at collectively, are this alien anthology intelligence.

Due to our extraordinary propensity to gossip, what one of us knowsa€”or rather believesa€’’pretty 
soon all of us knowa€”or, rather can believe. Alone, each of us is nearly totally incompetent at 
managing our environment: put one of us out naked and alone even in as green and pleasant a land is 
the home counties of England, and he or she would be likely to die. But assemble us and allow us
to form a division of labor, and we can undertake mighty works of nature manipulation to challenge 
the gods. Certainly that extremely large red-bearded guy with serious anger-management problems, 
that guy who likes to drink and whose hammer is the lightning called a€oeThora€D, has nothing over 
us.

But in order to become an anthology communicative intelligence, we have to share not only a 
language but also an underlying mental map of how the universe works. And in order to become an 
anthology productive intelligence, we have to have trust in othersa€”that you do your and they do 
their part in the division of labor, and then that the products of labor by hand and brain will in 
fact be
shared. But how do you extend a language and a mental map beyond a very few people who have grown 
up togetheraCce? And how do you extend trust that your part in the division of labor will be 
reciprocated beyond your close kin and immediate neighbors?

What happens when we extend our division of labor from our immediate circle of neighbors and kin to 
encompass all 8 billion of usa€”that is the province of economics.
What happens when we construct at least semi-shared mental maps so that communication can 
succeeda€”that is the province of sociology.

What happens when our anthology intelligence attempt reflection on its purposes and 
structured’’that is the province of political science.


N2PE: Gillian Tett (@ gilliantett) Discusses Her New Book a€oeAnthro-Vision: A New Way to See in 
Business & Lifea€E2 Amid severe digital disruption, economic upheaval, and political flux, how can 
we make sense of the world? Leaders today typically look for answers in economic models, Big Data, 
or artificial intelligence platforms. Gillian Tett will discuss her new book that points to
anthropology a€’’the study of human culture. Anthropologists learn to get inside the minds of other 
people, helping them not only to understand other cultures but also to appraise their own 
environment with fresh perspective as an insider-outsider, gaining lateral vision. Moderated by 
Brad DeLong (@delong) with Comments from Julia Sizek (@ JuliaS izek). RSVP for Zoom Link:

<https://t.co/D7jbqQ 1KL4 https://t.co/BO2v3Tk37v> 
<https://twitter.com/N2PENetwork/status/1461061581685460998>
Share

My Proposed Intro: One of the cheesier and more adolescent of the sub-genres of science fiction I 
must admit I still read what is one in which some plucky human hero is confronted with an anthology 
intelligence: millions of organisms, each of them small and mindless on its own, yet somehow adding 
up to a human or more than human intelligence with Ailien and hard-to-understand belief
and purposes.

But it is we humans who, looked at collectively, are this alien anthology intelligence.

Due to our extraordinary propensity to gossip, what one of us knowsa€”or rather believesa€’’pretty 
soon all of us knowa€”or, rather can believe. Alone, each of us is nearly totally incompetent at 
managing our environment: put one of us out naked and alone even in as green and pleasant a land is 
the home counties of England, and he or she would be likely to die. But assemble us and allow us
to form a division of labor, and we can undertake mighty works of nature manipulation to challenge 
the gods. Certainly that extremely large red-bearded guy with serious anger-management problems, 
that guy who likes to drink and whose hammer is the lightning called a€oeThora€D, has nothing over 
us.

But in order to become an anthology communicative intelligence, we have to share not only a 
language but also an underlying mental map of how the universe works. And in order to become an 
anthology productive intelligence, we have to have trust in othersa€”that you do your and they do 
their part in the division of labor, and then that the products of labor by hand and brain will in 
fact be
shared. But how do you extend a language and a mental map beyond a very few people who have grown 
up togetheraCce? And how do you extend trust that your part in the division of labor will be 
reciprocated beyond your close kin and immediate neighbors?

What happens when we extend our division of labor from our immediate circle of neighbors and kin to 
encompass all 8 billion of usa€”that is the province of economics.
What happens when we construct at least semi-shared mental maps so that communication can 
succeeda€”that is the province of sociology.

What happens when our anthology intelligence attempt reflection on its purposes and 
structured’’that is the province of political science.

But the processes by which we do thesea€”those are the domains of anthropology, which is in this 
sense the ur-social science on top of which all else is built.

So let us pay attention this afternoon to Gillian Tett, of the tribes of the Financial Times and of 
the anthropology community, author of the very recently published Anthro-Vision: How Anthropology 
Can Explain Business and Life 
<https://www.amazon.com/Anthro-Vision-Anthropology-Explain-Business-Life/dp/1847942881/>
Listen to her: for I believe it is her training in anthropology that has made her uniquely 
insightful journalist an analyst throughout her career.

Gillian: 30 minutes? Please put questions in the chat so that I can draw on them after she finishes 
and after Julia Sizek comments.

Let me invoke my moderatora€™ s privilege to make two comments:

The first is this pictured”! didn't think it made you look incredibly grumpy. I did make you think 
it looks serious and thoughtful and considerate andd’T don't want to say doethe antithesis of a 
d~Fox Babed™ , because most of those women are extremely smart, and very good at 
presentation-of-self in ways important to their careers; but doethe antithesis of a d~Fox Babed™ 
dD.

The second is that when you said that Greenspan chased you down and asked for a book of 
anthropology about the Greeks. I was confused: I understood a€ceGreeksa€D to mean not doepeople in 
GreecedD, but instead doethe Greek letters in financial formulasa€D. And I was thinking that 
someone has written an anthropology of the symbology of Ito processes, until I finally realized my
mistake.

Brad DeLong: May I grab the moderatord™ s privilege to ask the last question, apropos of the return 
of barter?

Partha Dasgupta writes that we started out doing the division-of-labor thing with our kin and our 
immediate neighbors, with the division-of-labor made possible via our thick, ongoing long-time 
extended gift exchange relationships with those that we had good sociological reason to trust. Then 
we invented money. Money was liquid trust. You no longer had to know someone very well to have
them be part of your division -of-labor. All 8 billion of us could be part of our division-of-labor 
through the non-extended one-shot gift-exchange relationships that we call dcebuyingdD and 
dcesellingdD.

From money as a trust token we then get to token of money to monetary deb. And then, somehow, the 
moneylender gives you a gift and puts you even further into sociological debt to him by only 
collecting half your interest due now and adding the other half onto the principle, thus putting 
you further into economic debt as well.
Now we find ourselves bypassing the trust-token of money, and returning to swappinga€’’swapping 
data for services. Somehow we have micropayments for advertisements via Google but not 
micropayments for information and entertainment.

I look at this, and I find that I have very different reactions:

Jeff Bezosa€”Amazona€’’wants my money and my data. I am happy to give it to him. I know he will use 
my data to try to put things on front of my nose that I might want to buy and enjoy. And I will 
know that I can put the item in my shopping bag, and then I will go off and think about it for a 
day or a week or two, and maybe come backa€”if I think the purchase will make me happy, and I
believe that if I decide to make the purchase it will make me happy. Jeff Bezosa€”Amazona€”is my 
gift-exchange relationship friend, in that our sociological exchange ties are to our mutual benefit 
and the reinforcement of at least a simulacrum of mutual benevolent concern for each other.

On the other hand Jack Dorseya€”Twittera€’’wants my data and wants my money. He wants my data so 
that he can construct an algorithmic feed that will keep me clicking on tweets so he can show me 
more ads: he wants to glue my eyeballs to his screen even ifa€”perhaps especially if, since 
fight-or-flight is a strong psychological forcea€”it makes me unhappy. In some sense he is not my
friend: our interactions here do not create what Albert Hirschman called doux commerce, sweet 
commerce, as we view everyone around us as a potential partner in win-win exchange, and thus as a 
benevolently-intentioned friend. I view Jack Dorsey as someone who wants to hack my 
braina€’’diminish my autonomy to direct my attention where my considered self would wisha€’’without 
having
the slightest concern for whether this attention-hacking is for my ill or not.

How should we think about these issues?

Gillian Tett: I think I have 30 seconds to answer. You raised a huge question, requiring the 
blending of economic thinking with computer science and technology and social science. Rather than 
try and give a quick answer let me simply suggest that this is going to be probably one of the most 
fruitful areas for economists and for anthropologists to dive into in the coming yearsa€!. We will 
see
anevolutionary break point on many levels, about how we imagine money and value in a world of 
digital connections. Who we trust, how we build cohesion, and how we look at power structures is 
shifting very fasta€!. This is going to get more and more important in the years ahead. I salute 
the work that people are doing in the world of data science and computer science and social 
sciencea€!.
The questions you end on are incredibly important. I throw them over to your amazing community to 
pick them up and run with it.

Brad DeLong: And with that, Gillian Tett performatively demonstrates that her ultimate and highest 
allegiance is to the tribe of academia, for she has ended with a call for further research. Thank 
you very much for coming. This has been greatly greatly appreciated. This has been truly wonderful. 
Thank you again, thank you all for coming.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

