Subscribe now

CONDITION: WTF?!:

Share

FOCUS: Time to Start Planning for Spring 2023 Econ 210a: a€oelntroduction to Economic Historya€D 
(for First-Year Graduate Students):

[1] Intro:

• Robert M. Solow (1985): Economic History & Economics 
<https://www-jstor-org.libproxy.berkeley.edu/stable/pdf/1805620.pdf>.

• Kenneth Arrow (1985): Maine & Texas <https://www-jstor-org 
.libproxy.berkeley.edu/stable/pdf/1805618 .pdf>

[2] Malthusian Economies:

• Jared Diamond (1987): The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race <http://discovermagazine 
.com/1987/may/02-the-worst-mistake-in-the-history-of-the-human-race>;

• Richard Steckel (2008): Biological Measures of the Standard of Living <http://www.aeaweb 
.org/articles .php?doi= 10.1257/jep .22.1.129>;

• Gregory Clark (2005): The Condition of the Working Class in England, 1209a€“2004 < www. 
jstor.org/stable/pdfplus/10.1086/ .pdf>.

[3] Technology & Growth Before 1800:

• Michael Kremer (1993): Population Growth & Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990 
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/2118405>

• Moses Finley (1965): Technical Innovation & Economic Progress in the Ancient World 
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/2591872>

[4] Domination & Inequality:

• Branko Milanovic, Peter H. Lindert, & Jeffrey G. Williamson (2010): Pre-Industrial Inequality 
<http ://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/doi/10.1111 /j.1468-0297.2010.02403.x/abstract>

•  Alberto Alesina, Paola Giuliano, & Nathan Nunn (2013): On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and 
the Plough <https://academic .oup .com/q je/article/128/2/469/1943509>

• Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels (1848): Manifesto of the Communist Party <http://www.marxists 
.org/archive/marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/>

[5] Shadows of Slavery:

• Nathan Nunn (2008): The Long-Term Effects of Africaa€™ s Slave Trades 
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/pdfplus/25098896.pdf>

•  Frederick Law Olmsted (1861): The Cotton Kingdom: A Traveller's Observations on Cotton & Slavery 
In The American Slave States pp. 143-183 <https://archive.org/details/cottonkingdomtraOOolms>

•  Stanley Engerman & Kenneth Sokoloff (1994): Factor Endowments, Institutions & Differential Paths 
of Development among New World Economies <http: //papers .nber.org/papers/h0066>

[6] Transforming Modes of Production: Commerce:

• Jan de Vries (1994): The Industrial Revolution and the Industrious Revolution <https: //www.j 
stor.org/stable/2123912>

• Jeremiah Dittmar (2011): Information Technology and Economic Change: The Impact of The Printing 
Press <https://www.jstor.org/stable/23015698>

• Robert P. Brenner (2001): The Low Countries in the Transition to Capitalism 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20160910131149if /http://www.unsa.edu.ar: 
80/histocat/haeconomica07/lecturas/lawcountries.pdf>

[7] Transforming Modes of Production: Agriculture:

• Robert C. Allen (1999): Tracking the Agricultural Revolution in England 
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/2599937>

• Gregory Clark.(2001): The Secret History of the Industrial Revolution 
<http://faculty.econ.ucdavis .edu/facultv/gclark/papers/secret2001 ,pdf>

[8] Technology & Growth since 1800:

• Robert Allen (2009): Why Was the Industrial Revolution British? 
<https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/why-was-industrial-revolution-british>

• J. Vernon Henderson, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil (2012): Measuring Economic Growth from 
Outer Space <https://www-jstor-org.libproxv.berkeley.edu/stable/23245442>

• Simon Kuznets (1971): Modern Economic Growth: Findings and Reflections 
<https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/economic-sciences/1971 /kuznets/lecture/>

• Chad Jones (2015): The Facts of Economic Growth <https: //web .Stanford ,edu/~chad j/facts ,pdf>

[9] Modern Industrial Structures:

• Alfred Chandler: Scale & Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism, pp. 3-89 <https ://archive 
.org/details/scalescopedynamiOOchan>

• Richard Baldwin: The Great Convergence, pp. 1-15,79-141,177-206,242-279 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/book-baldwin-great-convergence-selections.pd
f>

[10] Divergence:

• Lant Pritchett (1997): Divergence, Big Time <http://tinyurl .com/dl20090112o>

• W. Arthur Lewis (1978): Evolution of the International Economic Order 
<https://bcourses.berkelev.edu/courses/1500790/files?preview=79849941>

• Jeffrey G. Williamson (2002): Land, Labor, and Globalization in the Third World, 1870-1940 
<https://bcourses.berkeley.edu/courses/1500790/files ?preview=79850054>

[11] Convergence?:

•  Peter J. Klenow & Andres Rodriguez-Clare (1997): The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Economics: 
Has It Gone too Far? <https://delong.typepad.com/klenow-rodriguez-clare.pdf>

• Michael Kremer, Jack Willis, & Yang You (2021): Converging to Convergence 
<https://www.nber.org/books-and-chapters/nber-macroeconomics-annual-2021-volume-36/converging-conver
gence>

[12] The New Deal Order


• Jason Scott Smith (2008): The New Deal Order <https://www.jstor.org/stable/23701170>

• Gary Gerstle (2022): The Rise & Fall of the Neoliberal Order (excerpts)

• Brad DeLong (2022): Slouching Towards Utopia (excerpts)

[13] The Neoliberala€O Order

• Gary Gerstle (2022): The Rise & Fall of the Neoliberal Order (excerpts)

• Brad DeLong (2022): Slouching Towards Utopia (excerpts)

MUST-READ:

a€0 Dan Shipper: I Built an AI Chatbot Based On My Favorite Podcast
a€0 I Built an AI Chatbot Based On My Favorite Podcast

a€0 Herea€™ s how I built it and what I learned about the future
a€0 by Dan Shipper

a€0 Chatbots as a new content format

a€0 Being able to easily turn any corpus of text into a reasonably good chat bot is a big deal, for 
readers and ita€™ s also a huge deal for content creators. It also has significanta€”and 
positivea€’’business implications.

a€0 To start, it means that therea€™ s a new way to monetize any existing set of intellectual 
property. You might not pay to access a back catalog of all Huberman Lab episodesa€”but if that 
back catalog was reformatted to be a chatbot that could instantly answer your science questions, 
therea€™ s a good bet youa€™ d input your credit card. The same is true for all sorts of writers, 
podcasters, and YouTubers across the content creation spectrum.

a€0 In the future, anything thata€™ s used as a reference should become a chat bot. Wirecutter, 
Eater, and more should all be accessible this way so that when I have a product I want to buy, or 
Ia€™ m in need of a restaurant to visit I dona€™ t have to scroll through a list of articles with 
lots of options. Instead, I can just ask, a€oeWhata€™ s a good place to eat in Fort Greene 
tonight?a€D and get a response thata€™ s based on the latest Eater reviews in my
neighborhood.

a€0 There are hundreds of thousands of copyrighted text, audio, and video corpuses that can be 
valuable chatbots todaya€”all thata€™ s needed is someone willing to make them. Even if you cana€™ 
t code, therea€™ s a valuable opportunity to buy the rights to turn this information into chatbots 
and sell them later to a bidder who can.

a€0 This doesna€™t just extend to bodies of text that are intended to be read by the general 
public. For a long time Ia€™ ve been enamored with the idea that every company should have a 
librariana€’’someone who is tasked with writing down tacit knowledge in the organization, making 
sure all documents are up to date, and answering repetitive questions. It would save a lot of time 
for employees, reduce unnecessary confusion, and enable different parts of
the organization to collaborate more effectively. a€~a€~a€~

ONE IMAGE: British Regional Median Income Statistics:

I do not understand the economic geography of Britain: What is going on witha€l Whitehavena€! St. 
Beesa€! Sellafielda€! Ravenglassa€! Millom on the west-central coast. I mean, the climate is not 
Malibu:

Median gross earnings

as share of national average

Full-time employees, 2020-22

% of national average


■ Above                           x-

■ 140                                         ' Ja

— 130

— 120                                     >

S Scotland


110

100

90


80

Below

No data

i


London

