It is, however, very much worth reading for other reasons. It provides a very good introduction to 
A©lite American foreign-policy establishment thinking at the start of the 1950s about how a post 
imperialism world should work:

Get this a€~Stack in your email inbox. &/or become a paid subscriber support my hiring an RA for 
this, & to get the Directora€™ s Cutew posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid 
subscriber:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Dean G. Acheson (January 12,1950): Crisis in Asia: An Examination ofU.S. Policy. a€~This afternoon 
I should like to discuss with you the relations between the peoples of the United States and the 
peoples of Asia, and I used the words a€oerelations of the peoples of the United States and the 
peoples of Asiaa€D advisedly. I am not talking about governments or nations because it seems to
me what I want to discuss with you is this feeling of mine that the relations depend upon the 
attitudes of the people; that there are fundamental attitudes, fundamental interests, fundamental 
purposes of the people of the United States, 150 million of them, and of the peoples of Asia, 
unnumbered millions, which determine and out of which from their relations of our countries and the 
policies of
our governments. Out of these attitudes and interests and purposes grow what we do from day to day.

Now leta€™ s dispose of one idea right at the start and not bother with it any more. That is that 
the policies of the United States are determined out of abstract principles in the Department of 
State or in the White house or in the Congress. That is not the case. If these polices are going to 
be good, they must grow out of the fundamental attitudes of our people on both sides. If they are 
to be
effective, they must become articulate through all the institutions of our national life, of which 
this is one of the greatesta€“through the press, through the radio, through the churches, through 
the labour unions, through the business organizations, through all the groupings of our national 
life, there must become articulate the attitudes of our people and the policies which we propose to 
follow.
It seems to me that understanding is the beginning of wisdom and therefore, we shall begin by 
trying to understand before we announce what we are going to do, and that is a proposition so 
heretical in this town that I advance it with some hesitation.

Now, leta€™ s consider some of the basic factors which go into the making of the attitudes of the 
peoples on both sides. I am frequently asked: Has the State Department got an Asian policy? And it 
seems to me that that discloses such a depth of ignorance that it is very hard to begin to deal 
with it. The peoples of Asia are so incredibly diverse and their problems are so incredibly diverse 
that
how could anyone, even the most utter charlatan believe that he had a uniform policy which would 
deal with all of them. On the other hand, there are very important similarities in ideas and in 
problems among the peoples of Asia and so what we come to, after we understand these diversities 
and these common attitudes of mind, is the fact that there must be certain similarities of 
approach, and
there must be very great dissimilarities in action.

To illustrate this only a moment: If you will consider as an example of the differences in Asia the 
subcontinent of India and Pakistan, you will find there an area which is roughly comparable in size 
and population to Europe. You will find that the different states and provinces of that 
subcontinent are roughly comparable in size to the nations of Europe and yet you will find such 
differences in
race, in ideas, in languages, and religion, and culture, that compared to that subcontinent, Europe 
is almost one homogeneous people.

Or take the difference, for instance, between the people and problems of Japan and Indonesia, both 
in the same Asian area. In Japan, you have a people far advanced in the complexities of industrial 
civilization, a people whose problems grow out of overpopulation on small islands and the necessity 
of finding raw materials to bring in and finding markets for the finished goods which they
produce. In Indonesia, you find something wholly differenta€“a peoplea€™ on the very threshold of 
their experience with these complexities and a people who live in an area which possesses vast 
resources which are awaiting development. Now, those are illustrations of complexities.

Emerging Independence: Leta€™ s come now to the matters which Asia has in common. There is in this 
vast area what we might call a developing Asian consciousness, and a developing pattern, and this, 
I think, is based upon two factors which are pretty nearly common to the entire experience of all 
these Asian people.

One of these factors is a revulsion against the acceptance of misery and poverty as the normal 
condition of life. Throughout all of this vast area, you have that fundamental revolutionary aspect 
in mind and belief. The other common aspect that they have is the revulsion against foreign 
domination. Whether that foreign domination takes the form of colonialism or whether it takes the 
form of
imperialism, they are through with it. They have had enough of it, and they want no more.

These two basic ideas which are held so broadly and commonly in Asia tend to fuse in the minds of 
many Asian peoples and many of them tend to believe that if you could get rid of foreign 
domination, if you could gain independence, then the relief from poverty and misery would follow 
almost in course. It is easy to point out that that is not true, and of course, they are 
discovering that it is
not true. But underneath that belief, there was a very profound understanding of a basic truth and 
it is the basic truth which underlies all our democratic belief and all our democratic concept. 
That truth is that just as no man and no government is wise enough and disinterested enough to 
direct the thinking and the action of another individual, so no nation and no people are wise 
enough and
disinterested enough very long to assume the responsibility for another people or to control 
another peoplea€™ s opportunities.

That great truth they have sensed, and on that great truth they are acting. They say and they 
believe that from now on they are on their own. They will make their own decisions. They will 
attempt to better their own lot, and on occasion they will make their own mistakes. But it will not 
be their mistakes, and they are not going to have their mistakes dictated to them by anybody else. 
The
symbol of these concepts has become nationalism. National independence has become the symbol both 
of freedom from foreign domination and freedom from the tyranny of poverty and misery.

Since the end of the war in Asia, we have seen over 500 million people gain their independence and 
over seven new nations come into existence in this area.


This is the outward and visible sign of the internal ferment of Asia. But this ferment change is 
not restricted to these countries which are just gaining their independence. It is common idea and 
the common pattern of Asia and as I tried to suggest a moment ago, it is not based on purely 
political conceptions. It is not based purely on ideological conceptions. It based on a fundamental 
and an
earthy and a deeply individual realization of the problems of their own daily lives. This new sense 
of nationalism means that they are going to deal with those daily problemsa€“the problems of the 
relation of man to the soil, the problem of how much can be exacted from them by the tax collectors 
of the state. It is rooted in those ideas. With those ideas they are going forward. Resignation is
no longer the typical emotion of Asia. It has given way to hope, a sense of effort, and in many 
cases, to a real sense of anger.

Recent Developments in China: Now, may I suggest to you that much of the bewilderment which has 
seized the minds of many of us about recent developments in China comes from a failure to 
understand this basic revolutionary force which is loose in Asia. The reasons for the fall of the 
Nationalist Government in China are preoccupying many people. All sorts of reasons have been
attributed to it. Most commonly, it is said in various speeches and publications that it is the 
result of American bungling, that we are incompetent, that we did not understand, that American aid 
was too little, that we did the wrong things at the wrong time. Other people go on and say: a€oeNo, 
it is not quite that, but that an American general did not like Chiang Kai-shek and out of all that
relationship grows the real trouble. a€D And they say: a€oeWell, you have to add to that there are 
a lot of women fooling around in politics in China.a€D

Nobody, I think, says that the Nationalist Government fell because it was confronted by 
overwhelming military force which it could not resist. Certainly no one in his right mind suggests 
that. Now, what I ask you to do is to stop looking for a moment under the bed and under the chair 
and under the rug to find out these reasons, but rather to look at the broad picture and see 
whether something
doesna€™ t suggest itself.

The broad picture is that after the war, Chiang Kai-shek emerged as the undisputed leader of the 
Chinese people. Only one faction, the Communists, up in the hills, ill-equipped, ragged, a very 
small military force, was determinedly opposed to his position. He had overwhelming military power, 
greater military power than any ruler ever had in the entire history of China. He had tremendous
economic and military support and backing from the United States. He had the acceptance of all 
other foreign countries, whether sincerely or insincerely in the case of the Soviet Union is not 
really material to this matter. Here he was in this position, and 4 years later what do we find? We 
find that his armies have melted away. His support in the country has melted away. His support 
largely
outside the country melted away, and he is a refugee on a small island off the coast of China with 
the remnants of his forces.

As I said, no one says that vast armies moved out of the hills and defeated him. To attribute to 
the inadequacy of American aid is only to point out the depth and power of the forces which 
miscalculated or ignored. What has happened in my judgment is that the almost inhaustible patience 
of the Chinese people in their misery ended. They did not bother to overthrow this government. There
was really nothing to overthrow. They simply ignored it throughout the country. They took the 
solution of their immediate village problems into their own hands. If there was any trouble or 
interference with the representatives of the government, they simply brushed them aside. They 
completely withdraw their support from this government, and when that support was withdrawn, the 
whole
military establishment disintegrated. Added to the grossest incompetence ever experienced by any 
military command was this total lack of support both in the armies and in the country, and so the 
whole matter just simply disintegrated.

The Communists did not create this. The Communists did not create this condition. They did not 
create this revolutionary spirit. They did not create a great force which moved out from under 
Chiang Kai-shek. But they were shrewd and cunning to mount it to ride this thing into victory and 
into power. That I suggest to you, is an explanation which has certain roots in realism and which 
does
not require all this examination of intricate and perhaps irrelevant details. So much for the 
attitudes of the peoples of Asia.

U.S. Attitude Toward Asia: Leta€™ s consider for a moment another important factor in this 
relationship. That is the attitude of our own people to Asia. What is that fundamental attitude out 
of which our policy has grown? What is the history of it? Because history is very important, and 
history furnishes the belief on the one side in the reality and truth of the attitude.
What has our attitude been toward the peoples of Asia? It has been, I submit to you, that we are 
interesteda€“that Americans as individuals are interested in the peoples of Asia. We are not 
interested in them as pawns or as subjects for exploitation but just as people.

For 100 years some Americans have gone to Asia to bring in what they thought was the most valuable 
thing they hada€ “their fait. They wanted to tell them what they thought about the nature and 
relationship of man to God. Others, went to them to bring to them what they knew of learning. 
Others went to them to bring them healing for their bodies. Others and perhaps fewer went to them to
learn the depth and beauty of their own cultures, and some went to them to trade and they traded 
with them. But this trade was a very small part of American interest in the Far East, and it was a 
very small part of American interest in trade. It was a valid interest; it was a good interest. 
There was nothing wrong about it, but out of the total sum of the interests of the American people 
in Asia, it
was a comparatively small part.

Through all this period of time also, we had, and still have great interests in Asia. But let me 
point out to you one very important factor about our interests in Asia. That is that our interests 
have been parallel to the interests of the people of Asia. For 50 years, it has been the 
fundamental belief of the American peoplea€“and I am not talking about announcements of government 
but I mean a
belief of people in little towns and villages and churches and missionary forces and labor unions 
throughout the United Statesa€“it has been their profound belief that the control of China by a 
foreign power was contrary to American interests. The interesting part about that is it was not 
contrary to the interests of the people of China. There was not conflict but parallelism in that 
interest. And
so from the time of the announcement of the open door policy through the 9-power treaty to the very 
latest resolution of the General Assembly of the United Nations, we have stated that principle and 
we believe it. And similarly in all the rest of Asiaa€“in the Philippines, in India, in Pakistan 
and Indonesia, and in Korea for years and years and years, the interests of Americans throughout 
this
country have been in favor of their independence. This is where their independence, societies and 
their patriotic groups have come for funds and sympathy. The whole policy of our government insofar 
as we have responsibility in the Philippines was to bring about the accomplishment of this 
independence and our sympathy and help. The very real help which we have given other nations in
Asia  has been in that direction, and it is still in that direction.

The Factor of Communism: Now, I stress this, which you may think is a platitude, because of a very 
important fact: I hear almost every day someone say that the real interest of the United States is 
to stop the spread of communism. Nothing seems to me to put the cart before the horse more 
completely than that. Of course we are interested in stopping the spread of communism. But we are
interested for a far deeper reason than any conflict between the Soviet Union and the United 
States. We are interested in stopping the spread of communism because communism is a doctrine that 
we dona€™ t happen to like.

Communism is the most subtle instrument of Soviet foreign policy that has ever been devised, and it 
is really the spearhead of Russian imperialism which would, if it could, take from these people 
what they have won, what we want them to keep and develop, which is their own national 
independence, their own individual independence, their own development of their own resources for 
their
own good and not as mere tributary states to this great Soviet Union.

Now, it is fortunate that this point that I made does not represent any real conflict. It is an 
important point because people will do more damage and create more misrepresentation in the Far 
East by saying our interest is merely to stop the spread of communism than any other way. Our real 
interest is in those people as people. It is because communism is hostile to that interest that we 
want to
stop it. But it happens that the best way of doing both things is to do just exactly what the 
peoples of Asia want to do and what we want to help them to do, which is to develop a soundness of 
administration of these new government and to develop their resources and their technical skills so 
that they are not subject to penetration either through ignorance, or because they believe these 
false
promises, or because there is real distress in their areas. If we can help that development, if we 
can go forward with it, then we have brought about the best way that anyone knows of stopping this 
spread of communism.

It is important to take this attitude not as a mere negative. Reaction to communism but as the most 
positive affirmation of the most affirmative truth that we hold, which is in the dignity and right 
of every nation, of every people, and of every individual to develop in their own way, making their 
own mistakes, reaching their own triumphs but acting under their own responsibility. That is what
we are pressing for in the Far East, that is what we must affirm and not get mixed up with purely 
negative and inconsequential statements.

Soviet Attitude: Now, let me come to another underlying and important factor which determines our 
relations and, in turn, our policy with the peoples of Asia. That is the attitude of the Soviet 
Union toward Asia, and particularly towards those parts of Asia which are contiguous to the Soviet 
Union, and with great particularity this afternoon, to north China.

The attitude and interest of the Russians in north China, and in these other areas as well, long 
antedates communism. This is not something that has come out of communism at all. It long antedates 
it. But the Communist regime has added new methods, new skills, and new concepts to the thrust of 
Russian imperialism. This Communistic concept and techniques have armed Russian
imperialism with a new and most insidious weapon of penetration. Armed with these new powers, what 
is happening in China is that the Soviet Union is detaching the northern provinces [areas] of China 
from China and is attaching them to the Soviet Union. This process is complete in Outer Mongolia. 
It is nearly complete in Manchuria, and I am sure that in inner Mongolia and in Sinkiang
there  are very happy reports coming from Soviet agents to Moscow. This is what is going on. It is 
the detachment of these whole areas, vast areaa€’’populated by Chinesea€”the detachment of these 
areas from China and their attachment to the Soviet Union.

I wish to state this and perhaps sin against my doctrine of nondogmatism, but I should like to 
suggest at any rate that this fact that the Soviet Union is taking the four northern provinces of 
China is the single most significant, most important fact, in the relation of any foreign power 
with Asia.

Two Rules of U.S. Policy: What does that mean for us? It means something very, very significant. It 
means that nothing that we do and nothing that we say must be allowed to obscure the reality of 
this fact. All the efforts of propaganda will not be able to obscure it. The only thing that can 
obscure it is the folly of ill-conceived adventures on our part which easily could do so, and I 
urge all
who are thinking about these foolish adventures to remember that we must not seize the unenviable 
position which the Russians have carved out for themselves. We must not undertake to deflect from 
the Russians to ourselves the righteous anger, and the wrath, and the hatred of the Chinese people 
which must develop. It would be folly to deflect it to ourselves. We must take the position we
have always takena€“that anyone who violates the integrity of China is the enemy of China and is 
acting contrary to our own interest. That, I suggest to you this afternoon, is the first and the 
greatest rule in regard to the formulation of American policy toward Asia.

I suggest that the second rule is very like the first. That is to keep our own purposes perfectly 
straight, perfectly pure, and perfectly aboveboard and do not get them mixed-up with legal quibbles 
or the attempt to do one thing and really achieve another.

The consequences of this Russian attitude and this Russian action in China are perfectly enormous. 
They are saddling all those in China who are proclaiming their loyalty to Moscow, and who are 
allowing themselves to be used as puppets of Moscow, with the most awful responsibility which they 
must pay for. Furthermore, these actions of the Russians are making plainer than any speech, or
any utterance, or any legislation can make throughout all of Asia, what the true purposes of the 
Soviet Union are and what the true function of communism as an agent of Russian imperialism is. 
These I suggest to you are the fundamental factors, fundamental realities of attitude out of which 
our relations and policies must grow.

Military Security in the Pacific: Now, leta€™ s in the light of that consider some of thee 
policies. First of all, leta€™ s deal with the question of military security. I deal with it first 
because it is important and because, having stated our policy in that regard, we must clearly 
understand that the military menace is not the most immediate.
What is the situation in regard to the military security of the Pacific area, and what is our 
policy in regard to it?

In the first place, the defeat and the disarmament of Japan has placed upon the United States the 
necessity of assuming the military defense of Japan so long as that is required, both in the 
interest of our security and in the interests of the security of the entire Pacific area and, in 
all honor, in the interest of Japanese security. We have Americana€”and there are Au straliana€” 
troops in Japan. I am
not in a position to speak for the Australians, but I can assure you that there is no intention of 
any sort of abandoning or weakening the defenses of Japan and that whatever arrangements are to be 
made either through permanent settlement or otherwise, that defense must and shall be maintained.

This defensive perimeter runs along the Aleutians to Japan and then goes to the Ryukyus. We hold 
important defense positions in the Ryukyu Islands, and those we will continue to hold. In the 
interest of the population of the Ryukyu Islands, we will at an appropriate time offer to hold 
these islands under trusteeship of the United Nations. But they are essential parts of the 
defensive perimeter
of the Pacific, and they must and will be held.

The defensive perimeter runs from the Ryukyus to the Philippine Islands. Our relations, our 
defensive relations with the Philippines are contained in agreements between us. Those agreements 
are being loyally carried out and will be loyally carried out. Both peoples have learned by bitter 
experience the vital connections between our mutual defense requirements. We are in no doubt about 
that,
and it is hardly necessary for me to say an attack on the Philippines could not and would not be 
tolerated by the United States. But I hasten to add that no one perceives the imminence of any such 
attack.

So far as the military security of other areas in the Pacific is concerned, it must be clear that 
no person can guarantee these areas against military attack. But it must also be clear that such a 
guarantee is hardly sensible or necessary within the realm of practical relationship.

Should such an attack occura€”one hesitates to say where such an armed attack could come froma€”the 
initial reliance must be on the people attacked to resist it and then upon the commitments of the 
entire civilized world under the Charter of the United Nations which so far has not proved a weak 
reed to lean on byany people who are determined to protect their independenceagainst
outside aggression. But it is a mistake, I think, in considering Pacific and Far Eastern problems 
to become obsessed with military considerations. Important as they are, there are other problems 
that press, and these other problems are not capable of solution through military means. These 
other problems arise outof thesusceptibility of many areas, and manycountries in the Pacificarea, to
subversion and penetration. That cannot be stopped by military means.

Susceptibility to Penetration: The susceptibility to penetration arises because in many areas there 
are new governments which have little experience in governmental administration and have not become 
firmly established or perhaps firmly accepted in their countries. They grow, in part, from very 
serious economic problems, some of them growing out directly from the last war, others
growing indirectly out of the last war because of the disruptions of trade with other parts of the 
world, with the disruption of arrangements which furnished credit and management to these areas for 
many years. That has resulted in dislocation of economic effort and in a good deal of suffering 
among the peoples concerned. In part this susceptibility to penetration comes from the great social
upheaval about which I have been speaking, an upheaval which was carried on and confused a great 
deal by the Japanese occupation and by the propaganda which has gone on from Soviet sources since 
the war.

Here, then, are the problems in these other areas which require some policy on our part, and I 
should like to point out two facts to you and then discuss in more detail some of these areas.

The first fact is the great difference between our responsibility and our opportunities in the 
northern part of the Pacific area and in the southern part of the Pacific area In the north, we 
have direct responsibility in Japan and we have direct opportunity to act. The same thing to a 
lesser degree is true in Korea. There we had direct responsibility. And there we did act, and there 
we have a greater
opportunity to be effective than we have in the more southerly part.

In the southerly part of the area, we are one of many nations who can do no more than help. The 
direct responsibility lies with the peoples concerned. They are proud of their new national 
responsibility. You cannot sit around in Washington, or London, or Paris, or The Hague and 
determine what the policies are going to those areas. You can be willing to help, and can help only 
when the


imperialism with a new and most insidious weapon of penetration. Armed with these new powers, what 
is happening in China is that the Soviet Union is detaching the northern provinces [areas] of China 
from China and is attaching them to the Soviet Union. This process is complete in Outer Mongolia. 
It is nearly complete in Manchuria, and I am sure that in inner Mongolia and in Sinkiang
there are very happy reports coming from Soviet agents to Moscow. This is what is going on. It is 
the detachment of these whole areas, vast areaa€’’populated by Chinesea€”the detachment of these 
areas from China and their attachment to the Soviet Union.

I wish to state this and perhaps sin against my doctrine of nondogmatism, but I should like to 
suggest at any rate that this fact that the Soviet Union is taking the four northern provinces of 
China is the single most significant, most important fact, in the relation of any foreign power 
with Asia.

Two Rules of U.S. Policy: What does that mean for us? It means something very, very significant. It 
means that nothing that we do and nothing that we say must be allowed to obscure the reality of 
this fact. All the efforts of propaganda will not be able to obscure it. The only thing that can 
obscure it isthe folly of ill-conceived adventures on our part which easily could doso, and I urge 
all
who are thinking about these foolish adventures to remember that we must not seize the unenviable 
position which the Russians have carved out for themselves. We must not undertake to deflect from 
the Russians to ourselves the righteous anger, and the wrath, and the hatred of the Chinese people 
which must develop. It would befolly to deflect it to ourselves. Wemust take the positionwe
have always takena€“that anyone who violates the integrity of China is the enemy of China and is 
acting contrary to our own interest. That, I suggest to you this afternoon, is the first and the 
greatest rule in regard to the formulation of American policy toward Asia.

I suggest that the second rule is very like the first. That is to keep our own purposes perfectly 
straight, perfectly pure, and perfectly aboveboard and do not get them mixed-up with legal quibbles 
or the attempt to do one thing and really achieve another.

The consequences of this Russian attitude and this Russian action in China are perfectly enormous. 
They are saddling all those in China who are proclaiming their loyalty to Moscow, and who are 
allowing themselves to be used as puppets of Moscow, with the most awful responsibility which they 
must pay for. Furthermore, these actions of the Russians are making plainer than any speech, or
any utterance, or any legislation can make throughout all of Asia, what the true purposes of the 
Soviet Union are and what the true function of communism as an agent of Russian imperialism is. 
These I suggest to you are the fundamental factors, fundamental realities of attitude out of which 
our relations and policies must grow.

Military Security in the Pacific: Now, leta€™ s in the light of that consider some of thee 
policies. First of all, leta€™ s deal with the question of military security. I deal with it first 
because it is important and because, having stated our policy in that regard, we must clearly 
understand that the military menace is not the most immediate.
What is the situation in regard to the military security of the Pacific area, and what is our 
policy in regard to it?

In the first place, the defeat and the disarmament of Japan has placed upon the United States the 
necessity of assuming the military defense of Japan so long as that is required, both in the 
interest of our security and in the interests of the security of the entire Pacific area and, in 
all honor, in the interest of Japanese security. We have Americana€”and there are Au straliana€” 
troops in Japan. I am
not in a position to speak for the Australians, but I can assure you that there is no intention of 
any sort of abandoning or weakening the defenses of Japan and that whatever arrangements are to be 
made either through permanent settlement or otherwise, that defense must and shall be maintained.

This defensive perimeter runs along the Aleutians to Japan and then goes to the Ryukyus. We hold 
important defense positions in the Ryukyu Islands, and those we will continue to hold. In the 
interest of the population of the Ryukyu Islands, we will at an appropriate time offer to hold 
these islands under trusteeship of the United Nations. But they are essential parts of the 
defensive perimeter
of the Pacific, and they must and will be held.

The defensive perimeter runs from the Ryukyus to the Philippine Islands. Our relations, our 
defensive relations with the Philippines are contained in agreements between us. Those agreements 
are being loyally carried out and will be loyally carried out. Both peoples have learned by bitter 
experience the vital connections between our mutual defense requirements. We are in no doubt about 
that,
and it is hardly necessary for me to say an attack on the Philippines could not and would not be 
tolerated by the United States. But I hasten to add that no one perceives the imminence of any such 
attack.

So far as the military security of other areas in the Pacific is concerned, it must be clear that 
no person can guarantee these areas against military attack. But it must also be clear that such a 
guarantee is hardly sensible or necessary within the realm of practical relationship.

Should such an attack occura€”one hesitates to say where such an armed attack could come froma€”the 
initial reliance must be on the people attacked to resist it and then upon the commitments of the 
entire civilized world under the Charter of the United Nations which so far has not proved  aweak 
reed to leanon by any peoplewho are determinedto protect their independence against
outside aggression. But it is a mistake, I think, in considering Pacific and Far Eastern problems 
to become obsessed with military considerations. Important as they are, there are other problems 
that press, and these other problems are not capable of solution through military means. These 
other problems arise outof the susceptibility of manyareas, and many countries in the Pacificarea, 
to
subversion and penetration. That cannot be stopped by military means.

Susceptibility to Penetration: The susceptibility to penetration arises because in many areas there 
are new governments which have little experience in governmental administration and have not become 
firmly established or perhaps firmly accepted in their countries. They grow, in part, from very 
serious economic problems, some of them growing out directly from the last war, others
growing indirectly out of the last war because of the disruptions of trade with other parts of the 
world, with the disruption of arrangements which furnished credit and management to these areas for 
many years. That has resulted in dislocation of economic effort and in a good deal of suffering 
among the peoples concerned. In part this susceptibility to penetration comes from the great social
upheaval about which I have been speaking, an upheaval which was carried on and confused a great 
deal by the Japanese occupation and by the propaganda which has gone on from Soviet sources since 
the war.

Here, then, are the problems in these other areas which require some policy on our part, and I 
should like to point out two facts to you and then discuss in more detail some of these areas.

The first fact is the great difference between our responsibility and our opportunities in the 
northern part of the Pacific area and in the southern part of the Pacific area In the north, we 
have direct responsibility in Japan and we have direct opportunity to act. The same thing to a 
lesser degree is true in Korea. There we had direct responsibility. And there we did act, and there 
we have a greater
opportunity to be effective than we have in the more southerly part.

In the southerly part of the area, we are one of many nations who can do no more than help. The 
direct responsibility lies with the peoples concerned. They are proud of their new national 
responsibility. You cannot sit around in Washington, or London, or Paris, or The Hague and 
determine what the policies are going to those areas. You can be willing to help, and can help only 
when the
conditions are right for help to be effective.

Limitations of U.S. Assistance: That leads me to the other thing that I wanted to point out, and 
that is the limitation of effective American assistance. American assistance can be effective when 
it is the missing component in a situation which might otherwise be solved. The United States 
cannot furnish all these components to solve the question. It cannot furnish determination, it 
cannot
furnish the will, and it cannot furnish the loyalty of a people to its government. But if the will 
and if the determination exists and if the people are behind their government, then, and not always 
then, is there a very good chance. In that situation, American help can be effective and it can 
lead to an accomplishment which could not otherwise be achieved.

Japan.a€”Now, with that statement, leta€™ s deal very briefly - because the time is going on and I 
am almost equaling my performance in the Senate and Housea€”leta€™ s deal very briefly with some of 
the problems. Leta€™ s take the situation in Japan for a moment. There are three great factors to 
be faced. The security matter I have dealt with. Aside from that, there are the economic
questions and the political questions. In the political field, General MacArthur has been very 
successful and the Japanese are hammering out with some effort, and with some backsliding, and 
regaining and backsliding again of progress, a political system which is based on nonmilitaristic 
institutions.

In the economic field, we have not been so successful. That is in very large part due to the 
inherent difficulty of the problem. The problem arises with the necessity of Japan being able to 
buy raw materials and sell goods. The former connections of Japan with the mainland and with some 
of the islands have been disrupted. That has produced difficulties.The willingnessof other 
countriesto
receive Japanese goods has very much contracted since the war.

Difficulties of currency have added to those problems. But those matters have got to be faced and 
have got to be solved. Whether they are solved under a treaty or if the procedural difficulties of 
that are too great under some other mechanism, they must be solved along lines which permit the 
Japanese greater freedoma€’’complete freedomif possiblea€”to buy what they need in the worldand
to sell what they have to offer on the mainland of Asia, in southeast Asia, and in other parts of 
the world. That is the nature of the problem and it is a very tough one. It is one on which the 
occupation authorities, the Japanese government, ourselves, and others are working. There can be no 
magic solution to it.

Korea.a€“In Korea, we have taken great steps which have ended our military occupation, and in 
cooperation with the United Nations, have established an independent and sovereign country 
recognized by nearly all the rest of the world.

We have given that nation great help in getting itself established. We are asking the Congress to 
continue that help until it is firmly established, and that legislation is now pending before the 
Congress. The idea that we should scrap all of that, that we should stop half way through the 
achievement of the establishment of this country, seems to me to be the most utter defeatism and 
utter madness
in our interests in Asia. But there our responsibilities are more direct and our opportunities more 
clear. When you move to the south, you find that our opportunity is much slighter and that our 
responsibilities, except in the Philippines and there indirectly, are very small. Those problems 
are very confusing.

Philippines.a€“In the Philippines, we acted with vigor and speed to set up an independent sovereign 
nation which we have done. We have given the Philippines a billion dollars of direct economic aid 
since the war. We have spent another billion dollars in such matters as veteransa€™ benefits and 
other payments in the Philippines. Much of that money has not been used as wisely as we wish
it had been used, but here again, we come up against the matter of responsibility. It is the 
Philippine Government which is responsible. It is the Philippine Government which must make its own 
mistakes. What we can do is advise and urge, and if help continues to be misused, to stop giving 
the help. We cannot direct, we should not direct, we have not the slightest desire to direct. I 
believe that
there are indications that the Philippines may be facing serious economic difficulties. With 
energetic, determined action, they can perhaps be avoided or certainly minimized. Whether that will 
be true or not, I can not say, but it does not rest within the power of the American Government to 
determine that. We are always ready to help and to advise. That is all we can and all we should do.

Asia.a€“ Elsewhere in southeast Asia, the limits of what we can do are to help where we are wanted. 
We are organizing the machinery through which we can make effective help possible. The western 
powers are all interested. We all know the techniques. We have all had experiences which can be 
useful to those governments which are newly starting out if they want it. It cannot be useful if
they dona€™t want it. We know techniques of administration. We know techniques of organizing school 
districts, and road districts, and taxation districts. We know agricultural and industrial 
techniques, all of which can be helpful, and those we are preparing to make available if they are 
wanted, where they are wanted, and under circumstances where they have a fighting chance to be
successful. We will not do these things for the mere purpose of being active. They will not be done 
for the mere purpose of running around and doing good, but for the purpose of moving in where we 
are wanted to a situation where we have the missing component which, if put into the rest of the 
picture, will spell success. The situation in the different countries of Southeast Asia is 
difficult. It
is  highly confused in Burma where five different factions have utterly disrupted the immediate 
government of the country. Progress is being made in Indochina where the French, although moving 
slowly, are moving. There are noticeable signs of progress in transferring responsibility to a 
local administration and getting the adherence of the population to this local administration. We 
hope that
the situation will be such that the French can make further progress and make it quickly, but I 
know full well the difficulties which are faced by the Foreign Minister of France and my admiration 
and respect for him are so great that I would not want one word I say to add a feather to the 
burden that he carries.

In Malaya, the British have and are discharging their responsibility harmoniously with the people 
of Malaya and are making progress.

Indonesia.a€ “In Indonesia, a great success has been achieved within the last few weeks and over a 
period of months. The round table conferences at The Hague in which great statesmanship and 
restraint were displayed, both on the Dutch and the Indonesian side, have resulted in this new 
government being formed. Relations of this government with the Dutch will be very good, and the 
Dutch
can furnish them great help and advice, and we will be willing to stand by to give whatever help we 
can rightly and profitably give. That situation is one which is full of encouragement although it 
is full of difficulty also.

India and Pakistan. a€“As one goes to the end of this semicircle and homes to India and Pakistan, 
we find really grave troubles facing the world and facing these two countries there, both with 
respect to Kashmir, and to the utter difficultiesa€“economic difficulties growing out of the 
differences in devaluation, settlement of monetary plans back and forth, et cetera. We know that 
they have
assured one another, and they have assured the world, that as stubborn as these difficulties may be 
and difficult as they may be of solution, they are not going to resort to war to solve them. We are 
glad to hear those assurances and the whole world is glad to hear it, but we know also that the 
problems are in such a situation and in such an area that they are most inflammable, and we believe 
that
in addition to these most desirable assurances there should be some accommodation of wills to bring 
about a result as soon as possible.

In India and in Pakistan we are willing to be of such help as we can be. Again, the responsibility 
is not ours. Again we can only be helpful friends. Again the responsibility lies with people who 
have won their freedom and who are very proud of it.

The New Day for Asia: So after this survey, what we conclude, I believe, is that there is a new day 
which has dawned in Asia. It is a day in which the Asian peoples are on their own, and know it, and 
intend to continue on their own. It is a day in which the old relationships between east and west 
are gone, relationships which at their worst were exploitation and which at their best were
paternalism. That relationship is over, and the relationship of east and west must now be in the 
Far East one of mutual respect and mutual helpfulness. We are their friends. Others are their 
friends. We and those others are willing to help, but we can only where we are wanted and only 
where the conditions of help are really sensible and possible. So what we can see is that this new 
day in Asia,
this   new day which is dawning, may go on to a glorious noon or it may darken and it may drizzle 
out. But that decision lies within the countries of Asia and within the power of the Asian people. 
It is not a decision which a friend or even an enemy from the outside can decide for them.

LINK: <https ://worldjpn.grips .ac. jp/documents/texts/docs/19500112.S1E,html>
Leave a comment

Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Subscribe now


do tar as me military security ot otner areas in me Facinc is concerned, it must oe clear mat no 
person can guarantee tnese areas against military attacK. But it must also oe clear mat sucn a 
guarantee is nardiy sensiote or necessary witnin me realm ot practical relationsnip.

Should such an attack occura€”one hesitates to say where such an armed attack could come froma€”the 
initial reliance must be on the people attacked to resist it and then upon the commitments of the 
entire civilized world under the Charter of the United Nations which so far has not proved a weak 
reed to lean on by any people who are determined to protect their independence against
outside aggression. But it is a mistake, I think, in considering Pacific and Far Eastern problems 
to become obsessed with military considerations. Important as they are, there are other problems 
that press, and these other problems are not capable of solution through military means. These 
other problems arise out of the susceptibility of many areas, and many countries in the Pacific 
area, to
subversion and penetration. That cannot be stopped by military means.

Susceptibility to Penetration: The susceptibility to penetration arises because in many areas there 
are new governments which have little experience in governmental administration and have not become 
firmly established or perhaps firmly accepted in their countries. They grow, in part, from very 
serious economic problems, some of them growing out directly from the last war, others
growing indirectly out of the last war because of the disruptions of trade with other parts of the 
world, with the disruption of arrangements which furnished credit and management to these areas for 
many years. That has resulted in dislocation of economic effort and in a good deal of suffering 
among the peoples concerned. In part this susceptibility to penetration comes from the great social
upheaval about which I have been speaking, an upheaval which was carried on and confused a great 
deal by the Japanese occupation and by the propaganda which has gone on from Soviet sources since 
the war.

Here, then, are the problems in these other areas which require some policy on our part, and I 
should like to point out two facts to you and then discuss in more detail some of these areas.

The first fact is the great difference between our responsibility and our opportunities in the 
northern part of the Pacific area and in the southern part of the Pacific area In the north, we 
have direct responsibility in Japan and we have direct opportunity to act. The same thing to a 
lesser degree is true in Korea. There we had direct responsibility. And there we did act, and there 
we have a greater
opportunity to be effective than we have in the more southerly part.

In the southerly part of the area, we are one of many nations who can do no more than help. The 
direct responsibility lies with the peoples concerned. They are proud of their new national 
responsibility. You cannot sit around in Washington, or London, or Paris, or The Hague and 
determine what the policies are going to those areas. You can be willing to help, and can help only 
when the
conditions are right for help to be effective.

Limitations of U.S. Assistance: That leads me to the other thing that I wanted to point out, and 
that is the limitation of effective American assistance. American assistance can be effective when 
it is the missing component in a situation which might otherwise be solved. The United States 
cannot furnish all these components to solve the question. It cannot furnish determination, it 
cannot
furnish the will, and it cannot furnish the loyalty of a people to its government. But if the will 
and if the determination exists and if the people are behind their government, then, and not always 
then, is there a very good chance. In that situation, American help can be effective and it can 
lead to an accomplishment which could not otherwise be achieved.

Japan.a€”Now, with that statement, leta€™ s deal very briefly - because the time is going on and I 
am almost equaling my performance in the Senate and Housea€”leta€™ s deal very briefly with some of 
the problems. Leta€™ s take the situation in Japan for a moment. There are three great factors to 
be faced. The security matter I have dealt with. Aside from that, there are the economic
questions and the political questions. In the political field, General MacArthur has been very 
successful and the Japanese are hammering out with some effort, and with some backsliding, and 
regaining and backsliding again of progress, a political system which is based on nonmilitaristic 
institutions.

In the economic field, we have not been so successful. That is in very large part due to the 
inherent difficulty of the problem. The problem arises with the necessity of Japan being able to 
buy raw materials and sell goods. The former connections of Japan with the mainland and with some 
of the islands have been disrupted. That has produced difficulties. The willingnessof other 
countriesto
receive Japanese goods has very much contracted since the war.

Difficulties of currency have added to those problems. But those matters have got to be faced and 
have got to be solved. Whether they are solved under a treaty or if the procedural difficulties of 
that are too great under some other mechanism, they must be solved along lines which permit the 
Japanese greater freedoma€’’complete freedomif possiblea€”to buy what they need in the worldand
to sell what they have to offer on the mainland of Asia, in southeast Asia, and in other parts of 
the world. That is the nature of the problem and it is a very tough one. It is one on which the 
occupation authorities, the Japanese government, ourselves, and others are working. There can be no 
magic solution to it.

Korea.a€“In Korea, we have taken great steps which have ended our military occupation, and in 
cooperation with the United Nations, have established an independent and sovereign country 
recognized by nearly all the rest of the world.

We have given that nation great help in getting itself established. We are asking the Congress to 
continue that help until it is firmly established, and that legislation is now pending before the 
Congress. The idea that we should scrap all of that, that we should stop half way through the 
achievement of the establishment of this country, seems to me to be the most utter defeatism and 
utter madness
in our interests in Asia. But there our responsibilities are more direct and our opportunities more 
clear. When you move to the south, you find that our opportunity is much slighter and that our 
responsibilities, except in the Philippines and there indirectly, are very small. Those problems 
are very confusing.

Philippines.a€ “In the Philippines, we acted with vigor and speed to set up an independent 
sovereign nation which we have done. We have given the Philippines a billion dollars of direct 
economic aid since the war. We have spent another billion dollars in such matters as veteransa€™ 
benefits and other payments in the Philippines. Much of that money has not been used as wisely as 
we wish
it had been used, but here again, we come up against the matter of responsibility. It is the 
Philippine Government which is responsible. It is the Philippine Government which must make its own 
mistakes. What we can do is advise and urge, and if help continues to be misused, to stop giving 
the help. We cannot direct, we should not direct, we have not the slightest desire to direct. I 
believe that
there are indications that the Philippines may be facing serious economic difficulties. With 
energetic, determined action, they can perhaps be avoided or certainly minimized. Whether that will 
be true or not, I can not say, but it does not rest within the power of the American Government to 
determine that. We are always ready to help and to advise. That is all we can and all we should do.

Asia.a€“ Elsewhere in southeast Asia, the limits of what we can do are to help where we are wanted. 
We are organizing the machinery through which we can make effective help possible. The western 
powers are all interested. We all know the techniques. We have all had experiences which can be 
useful to those governments which are newly starting out if they want it. It cannot be useful if
they dona€™t want it. We know techniques of administration. We know techniques of organizing school 
districts, and road districts, and taxation districts. We know agricultural and industrial 
techniques, all of which can be helpful, and those we are preparing to make available if they are 
wanted, where they are wanted, and under circumstances where they have a fighting chance to be
successful. We will not do these things for the mere purpose of being active. They will not be done 
for the mere purpose of running around and doing good, but for the purpose of moving in where we 
are wanted to a situation where we have the missing component which, if put into the rest of the 
picture, will spell success. The situation in the different countries of Southeast Asia is 
difficult. It
is  highly confused in Burma where five different factions have utterly disrupted the immediate 
government of the country. Progress is being made in Indochina where the French, although moving 
slowly, are moving. There are noticeable signs of progress in transferring responsibility to a 
local administration and getting the adherence of the population to this local administration. We 
hope that
the situation will be such that the French can make further progress and make it quickly, but I 
know full well the difficulties which are faced by the Foreign Minister of France and my admiration 
and respect for him are so great that I would not want one word I say to add a feather to the 
burden that he carries.

In Malaya, the British have and are discharging their responsibility harmoniously with the people 
of Malaya and are making progress.

Indonesia.a€ “In Indonesia, a great success has been achieved within the last few weeks and over a 
period of months. The round table conferences at The Hague in which great statesmanship and 
restraint were displayed, both on the Dutch and the Indonesian side, have resulted in this new 
government being formed. Relations of this government with the Dutch will be very good, and the 
Dutch
can furnish them great help and advice, and we will be willing to stand by to give whatever help we 
can rightly and profitably give. That situation is one which is full of encouragement although it 
is full of difficulty also.

India and Pakistan. a€“As one goes to the end of this semicircle and homes to India and Pakistan, 
we find really grave troubles facing the world and facing these two countries there, both with 
respect to Kashmir, and to the utter difficultiesa€“economic difficulties growing out of the 
differences in devaluation, settlement of monetary plans back and forth, et cetera. We know that 
they have
assured one another, and they have assured the world, that as stubborn as these difficulties may be 
and difficult as they may be of solution, they are not going to resort to war to solve them. We are 
glad to hear those assurances and the whole world is glad to hear it, but we know also that the 
problems are in such a situation and in such an area that they are most inflammable, and we believe 
that
in addition to these most desirable assurances there should be some accommodation of wills to bring 
about a result as soon as possible.

In India and in Pakistan we are willing to be of such help as we can be. Again, the responsibility 
is not ours. Again we can only be helpful friends. Again the responsibility lies with people who 
have won their freedom and who are very proud of it.

The New Day for Asia: So after this survey, what we conclude, I believe, is that there is a new day 
which has dawned in Asia. It is a day in which the Asian peoples are on their own, and know it, and 
intend to continue on their own. It is a day in which the old relationships between east and west 
are gone, relationships which at their worst were exploitation and which at their best were
paternalism. That relationship is over, and the relationship of east and west must now be in the 
Far East one of mutual respect and mutual helpfulness. We are their friends. Others are their 
friends. We and those others are willing to help, but we can only where we are wanted and only 
where the conditions of help are really sensible and possible. So what we can see is that this new 
day in Asia,
this   new day which is dawning, may go on to a glorious noon or it may darken and it may drizzle 
out. But that decision lies within the countries of Asia and within the power of the Asian people. 
It is not a decision which a friend or even an enemy from the outside can decide for them.

LINK: <https://worldipn.grips ,ac .jp/documents/texts/docs/19500112.S1E,html>
Leave a comment

Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Subscribe now

