Subscribe now

First:

Charles Gaba: America in One Image <https://twitter.com/charles_gaba/status/1416208984365846529>:

Charles #GetVaxxed! > 0

@charles_gaba

America in one image.

COVID-19 VACCINATION LEVELS OUT OF TOTAL POPULATION BY COUNTY


55%

50%

45%

40%

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%

0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 55% 60% 65% 70% 75% 80% 85% 90% 95% 100%

2020 Trump Vote %

Chris Hayes O @chrislhayes • Jul 16

Literally the only slim hope I have is that a sizable a summer outbreak will
modify behavior enough to get us closer to herd immunity for fall/winter, but


it s very clear we re going to have a sizable summer outbreak.

A:91 DM . hil 1A 9091 . TxA/ittor fnr iDhnno

We are a half-vaxxed country. And a country that looks like it is going to stay half-vaxxed: there 
is just too much money to be made by media grifters and too much political hay to be made by 
right-wing politicians seeking to win the Trump base for vaccination rates in the country as a 
whole to get above 50% before the Delta Variant sweeps through.
This is a catastrophe.

While hiking in Claremont Canyon earlier last week, I found myself to Andy Slavitta€™ s podcast. 
Andy had been one of the most positive influences on the rolling what-to-do-about-coronavirus 
debate. Yet I found it extremely disappointing to listen to:

On one of the podcasts I listened to he had as his guest Trump FDA Commissioner Scott Gotlieb. 
Gotlief had been one of the best of the Trump political appointees. (And, yes, I realize how 
incredibly low a bar that is, and how brutal is this damnation-with-faint-praise.) As I hiked down 
from Panoramic Ridge back to the house, I found myself depressed and let down.

The first reason I was let down was what seemed to be a constant mantra repeated over and over 
again by Slavitt and his guests alike: if you are vaccinated, resume your normal life without masks 
and without social distancinga€”you can do everything except go into a moist, crowded, hot batcave 
and sing for hours. And maybe you can do that. That seems to me to completely ignore the fact that 
we are a half­
vaccinated country. If you do get the Delta Variant in a breakthrough case, since we are a half 
vaccinated country and the Delta VariantaC™ s R[0] is between 4 and 8, you will give the disease to 
between 2 and 4 peoplea€”say 3. And in two weeks, they will each give it to 3 peoplea€”now we are 
at 12. After two months your downstream chain of infections will have given the disease to about 
363 people.

And odds are that 4 of them will die.

Arkansas

140 4 “ 7 day rolling average

120-

¹⁰⁰⁻                                                  Currently

34/100,000

80-

60-



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• James Arvin: How Climate Change Fueled the Devastating 2021 Floods in Germany & Northwest 
£Mrope<https://www.vox.com/22577431/germany-flooding-europe-climate-change>

• Richard Reis: Welcome to Tomorrowa€™ s Professor <https ://tomprof.Stanford,edu/>

• Coda: A New Doc for Teams <https://coda.io/welcome>

•  Cassie Kozyrkov: MFML Part 2 Has Arrived: a€~You can now enjoy 3 hours of Making Friends with 
Machine Learning. The wait is finally over. Today, Part 2 of Making Friends with Machine Learning, 
Googlea€™ s legendary AI course designed for technical and non-technical folks alike, is herea€! 
LINK: <https://decision.substack.eom/p/mfml-part-2-has-arrived>

•  Marc Chandler: Deja Vu All Over Again: a€~Palak Patel[a€™ s]a€! a€oeThe Tyranny of Nationsa€Da€l 
shows striking parallels between America today and the latter stages of the Dutch and British 
dominancea€! LINK: <http://www.marctomarket.com/2021/07/deia-vu-all-over-again.html>

•  Ed Yong: The Delta Variant Is Surging in Missouri: a€~For America as a whole, the pandemic might 
be fading. For some communities, this year will be worse than lasta€! <https://w 
ww.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2021/07/delta-missouri-pandemic-surge/619456/>

•  Ed Yong: The Danger of Delta Holds to 3 Simple Rules: a€~Vaccines are still beating the 
variants, but the unvaccinated world is being pummeleda€! 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2021/07/3-principles-now-define-pandemic/619336/>

Twitter:

• John Holbo & al.: Manic Pixie Dream Girls 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/pdfmakerapp-holbo-2021 -07-18 .pdf>

• Matt Oa€™Brien & al.: Jerome Powell & Lael Brainard 
<https://gith.ub.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/pdfmakerapp-obrien-2021 -07-18 .pdf>

• Amber Schmidtke & al.: Delta COVID <https://gith.ub 
.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/pdfmakerapp-schmidtke-2021 -07-18 ,pdf>

Paragraphs:

Eric Topol: a€~How to give a potent vaccine a Delta stress test^\. The varianta€™ s viral load 
~1,000X higher than previous strains (reflected by low CTs), more infectious in the early stages of 
the illness 
<https://virological.Org/t/viral-infection-and-transmission-in-a-large-well-traced-outbreak-caused-b
v-the-delta-sars-cov-2-variant/724>. Part of the challenge that Delta presents may be tied to this
findinga€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/EricTopol/status/1416213177398743049>

Chi Xu & al.: Future of the Human Climate Niche: a€~For thousands of years, humans have 
concentrated in a surprisingly narrow subset of Eartha€™ s available climatesa€! [with] mean annual 
temperatures around t*U13 A°C. This distribution likely reflects a human temperature niche related 
to fundamental constraints. We demonstrate that depending on scenarios of population growth and 
warming, over
the coming 50 y, 1 to 3 billion people are projected to be left outside the climate conditions that 
have served humanity well over the past 6,000 yearsa€!

LINK: <https://www.pnas .org/content/117/21/11350>

Lant Pritchett: How Do I Do Research That Is Both Reliable & New?t: a€~But then the question for 
younger academics and researchers is: a€oeBut isna€™t everything that can be shown at 5 sigma 
levels already known?a€Da€! Here are some examples of empirical work of mine that has been 5 sigma 
and reliable but nevertheless got attention as examples of situations in which this is possiblea€!. 
Digging
into the data to address a big conceptual debatea€!. What made the paper therefore a paper was to 
dig into the DHS reports and see that the DHS reported womena€™ s future fertility desiresa€! so 
one could see the fraction of women who reported wanting to have another childa€! who had, say, 2,4 
or 6 existing birthsa€! a measure of demanda€!. Use some (compelling) outside logic to put data and 
debates
in  a new lighta€!. Making the argument that GDP per capita has a lower bound as a demographically 
sustainable population requires at least some minimum level of outputs I. Sometimes one can make 
progress by bringing some common sense into numbers made comparable to existing data. So everyone 
knows that people have to eat to stay alive, I just said a€oewhat would be the GDP per capita of a
country that produced just enough food to produce caloric adequacy sufficient for demographic 
stability?a€Ua€! Combine data not normally combineda€!. Claudioa€! had assembled a collection of 
labor force surveys from many countriesa€!. The US data had information on peoplea€™ s income and 
their birth country and at what age they moved to the USA. So we couldcountrya€! estimate a wage
regression  for people born in Guatemala, educated in Guatemala, but now working the USA to a wage 
regression for people born in Guatemala, educated in Guatemala and working in Guatemala and 
therefore compute the wage gap for observationally equivalent workers between the two places. And 
we could do this for 40 countriesa€!. Combine data sets whereas all of the existing labor market 
studies did
analysis                                                                                            
                                                                                              on 
each of these data sets separately. Do the robustness by estimating the same thing for many 
countriesa€!

LINK: <https://lantpritchett.org/how-do-i-do-research-that-is-both-reliable-and-new/>

Hunter: Paint[ing] Ivanka as saint, Trump as Incapacitated, & Mike Pence as AmericadC™s hHero: 
a€~a€oeAnd lo, I did hold daddya€™ s stubby-fingered hands until he agreed to not do a coup, and 
then had to keep doing it throughout the day because he kept coming back to the ideaa€!a€D. All 
right, fine, whatever. Leta€™ s talk about the new book excerpt published in The Washington Post 
that
attempts to put detail to Donald Trumpa€™ s actions during the Jan. 6 insurrectiona€!. Donald 
TrumpaC[considerably closer to doing mostly unspecified worse things than had previously been 
reported. We again hear that Trump was completely checked-out, unable and/or unwilling to 
participate in chain of command decisions to protect the Capitol, lawmakers, or his own vice 
president. We again are told that
it  was Mike Pence who ordered Trumpa€™ s military commanders to get troops the hell over to the 
Capitol building right-the-hell-now, and that Trump had no part of it. But the most important thing 
we learn from this Very Important New Insider Look is that absolutely everybody except for Donald 
Trump was being noble and patriotic and doing all the right things during this time of crisis. From 
Mike Pence
to Mitch McConnell to an ill-described grandfather clock inside the Oval Office, anyone who had any 
input on how the story was told was, it turns out, an absolute damn hero. And, as usual, there was 
nobody more heroic than Ivanka Trump, presidential daughter and official White House crazyperson 
wranglera€!. Ivanka wants readers to know that she was a€ceupseta€D with Rudy Giuliania€™ s advice 
to
her father that Mike Pence be made to overthrow American government^!.. She was only at the Jan. 6 
rally because she needed to keep a€oetending to her father,a€D who was off his damn rocker at that 
point, and not because she was an active participant in the familya€™ s seditious plans. Melania 
could not make it to the event, because, and this is the actual damn excuse used, she needed to 
oversee a
previously scheduled photo shoot of White House rugsa€!. The whole story revolves around Trumpa€™ s 
top allies watching him push sedition and contemplate doing even worse, and the heroism of the 
story is well at least we got through that. Nobody directly opposed Trump. Nobody told him to go to 
hell. During their angriest moments, a few Republican senators referred to him mostly obliquely as 
a

cause of the violence they were denouncinga€’’before joining ranks to block all further attempts to 
either investigate or punish his acts. The a€cegooda€D story is that Donald Trump was, by Jan. 6, 
so incapacitated that he could not make decisions, so traitorous that he refused to condemn a 
violent insurrection on his behalf, organized by his own allies, and so dysfunctioning that his 
adult daughter had to
repeatedly intervene after his staff lost all ability to calm him. Thata€™ s the cleaned-up version 
that his longest-serving allies are freely admitting to. The true version is assuredly much, much 
worse, and therea€™ s still no assurance that wea€™ 11 hear ita€!

LINK: 
<https://www.dailvkos.eom/stories/2021/7/15/2040105/-New-book-excerpt-paints-Ivanka-as-saint-Trump-a
s-incapacitated-and-Mike-Pence-as-America-s-hero>


•  Ed Yong: The Delta Variant Is Surging in Missouri'. a€~For America as a whole, the pandemic 
might be fading. For some communities, this year will be worse than lasta€! 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2021/07/delta-missouri-pandemic-surge/619456/>

•  Ed Yong: The Danger of Delta Holds to 3 Simple Rules'. a€~Vaccines are still beating the 
variants, but the unvaccinated world is being pummeleda€! 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2021/07/3-principles-now-define-pandemic/619336/>

Twitter:

• John Holbo & al.: Manic Pixie Dream Girls <https ://github 
.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/pdfmakerapp-holbo-2021 -07-18 .pdf>

• Matt Oa€™Brien & al.: Jerome Powell & Lael Brainard 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/pdfmakerapp-obrien-2021 -07-18 .pdf>

• Amber Schmidtke & al.: Delta COVID <https://github 
.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/pdfmakerapp-schmidtke-2021 -07-18 .pdf>

Paragraphs:

Eric Topol: a€~How to give a potent vaccine a Delta stress test^\. The varianta€™ s viral load 
~1,000X higher than previous strains (reflected by low CTs), more infectious in the early stages of 
the illness 
<https://virological.Org/t/viral-infection-and-transmission-in-a-large-well-traced-outbreak-caused-b
y-the-delta-sars-cov-2-variant/724>. Part of the challenge that Delta presents may be tied to this
findinga€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/EricTopol/status/1416213177398743049>

Chi Xu & al.: Future of the Human Climate Niche: a€~For thousands of years, humans have 
concentrated in a surprisingly narrow subset of Eartha€™ s available climatesa€! [with] mean annual 
temperatures around a" UI3 A°C. This distribution likely reflects a human temperature niche related 
to fundamental constraints. We demonstrate that depending on scenarios of population growth and 
warming, over
the coming 50 y, 1 to 3 billion people are projected to be left outside the climate conditions that 
have served humanity well over the past 6,000 yearsa€!

LINK: <https://www.pnas.Org/content/l 17/21/11350>

Lant Pritchett: How Do I Do Research That Is Both Reliable & New?t: a€~But then the question for 
younger academics and researchers is: a€oeBut isna€™t everything that can be shown at 5 sigma 
levels already known?a€Da€! Here are some examples of empirical work of mine that has been 5 sigma 
and reliable but nevertheless got attention as examples of situations in which this is possiblea€!. 
Digging
into the data to address a big conceptual debatea€!. What made the paper therefore a paper was to 
dig into the DHS reports and see that the DHS reported womena€™ s future fertility desiresa€! so 
one could see the fraction of women who reported wanting to have another childa€! who had, say, 2,4 
or 6 existing birthsa€! a measure of demanda€!. Use some (compelling) outside logic to put data and 
debates
in  a new lighta€!. Making the argument that GDP per capita has a lower bound as a demographically 
sustainable population requires at least some minimum level of outputa€!. Sometimes one can make 
progress by bringing some common sense into numbers made comparable to existing data. So everyone 
knows that people have to eat to stay alive, I just said a€oewhat would be the GDP per capita of a
country that produced just enough food to produce caloric adequacy sufficient for demographic 
stability?a€Ua€! Combine data not normally combineda€!. Claudioa€! had assembled a collection of 
labor force surveys from many countriesa€!. The US data had information on peoplea€™ s income and 
their birth country and at what age they moved to the USA. So we couldcountrya€! estimate a wage
regression  for people born in Guatemala, educated in Guatemala, but now working the USA to a wage 
regression for people born in Guatemala, educated in Guatemala and working in Guatemala and 
therefore compute the wage gap for observationally equivalent workers between the two places. And 
we could do this for 40 countriesa€!. Combine data sets whereas all of the existing labor market 
studies did
analysis                                                                                            
                                                                                              on 
each of these data sets separately. Do the robustness by estimating the same thing for many 
countriesa€!

LINK: <https://lantpritchett.org/how-do-i-do-research-that-is-both-reliable-and-new/>

Hunter: Paint[ing] Ivanka as saint, Trump as Incapacitated, & Mike Pence as AmericadC™ s hHero: 
a€~a€oeAnd lo, I did hold daddya€™ s stubby-fingered hands until he agreed to not do a coup, and 
then had to keep doing it throughout the day because he kept coming back to the ideaa€!a€D. All 
right, fine, whatever. Leta€™ s talk about the new book excerpt published in The Washington Post 
that
attempts to put detail to Donald Trumpa€™ s actions during the Jan. 6 insurrectiona€!. Donald 
Trumpa€ [considerably closer to doing mostly unspecified worse things than had previously been 
reported. We again hear that Trump was completely checked-out, unable and/or unwilling to 
participate in chain of command decisions to protect the Capitol, lawmakers, or his own vice 
president. We again are told that
it  was Mike Pence who ordered Trumpa€™ s military commanders to get troops the hell over to the 
Capitol building right-the-hell-now, and that Trump had no part of it. But the most important thing 
we learn from this Very Important New Insider Look is that absolutely everybody except for Donald 
Trump was being noble and patriotic and doing all the right things during this time of crisis. From 
Mike Pence
to Mitch McConnell to an ill-described grandfather clock inside the Oval Office, anyone who had any 
input on how the story was told was, it turns out, an absolute damn hero. And, as usual, there was 
nobody more heroic than Ivanka Trump, presidential daughter and official White House crazyperson 
wranglera€!. Ivanka wants readers to know that she was a€ceupseta€D with Rudy Giuliania€™ s advice 
to

her father that Mike Pence be made to overthrow American government^!.. She was only at the Jan. 6 
rally because she needed to keep a€oetending to her father,a€D who was off his damn rocker at that 
point, and not because she was an active participant in the familya€™ s seditious plans. Melania 
could not make it to the event, because, and this is the actual damn excuse used, she needed to 
oversee a
previously scheduled photo shoot of White House rugsa€!. The whole story revolves around Trumpa€™ s 
top allies watching him push sedition and contemplate doing even worse, and the heroism of the 
story is well at least we got through that. Nobody directly opposed Trump. Nobody told him to go to 
hell. During their angriest moments, a few Republican senators referred to him mostly obliquely as a
cause of the violence they were denouncinga€’’before joining ranks to block all further attempts to 
either investigate or punish his acts. The a€cegooda€D story is that Donald Trump was, by Jan. 6, 
so incapacitated that he could not make decisions, so traitorous that he refused to condemn a 
violent insurrection on his behalf, organized by his own allies, and so dysfunctioning that his 
adult daughter had to
repeatedly intervene after his staff lost all ability to calm him. Thata€™ s the cleaned-up version 
that his longest-serving allies are freely admitting to. The true version is assuredly much, much 
worse, and therea€™ s still no assurance that wea€™ 11 hear ita€!

LINK: 
<https://www.dailykos.eom/stories/2021/7/15/2040105/-New-book-excerpt-paints-Ivanka-as-saint-Trump-a
s-incapacitated-and-Mike-Pence-as-America-s-hero>

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

