Very Briefly Noted:

•  Quinn Cummings: _a€™ I was in my mid-thirties before I realized I have face blindness. In my 
defense: 1. Not a serious case. Ia€I rarely scream in terror upon finding Consort in the showera€!

<https://twitter.com/quinncy/status/1406348740957327360>


•  Quinn Cummings: _a€™ I was in my mid-thirties before I realized I have face blindness. In my 
defense: 1. Not a serious case. Ia€! rarely scream in terror upon finding Consort in the showera€!

<https://twitter.com/quinncy/status/1406348740957327360>

•  Joana Duran-Franch: Oh, Man! What Happened to Women? The Blurring of Gender-Based Occupational 
Segregation: a€~Demographic changes have masked the labor market ei'-i€ects caused by the
demanualization during 1990a€“2016. The demanualization has decreased the aggregate employment rate 
of low-educated women by the same amount it has done for men, 8.1 percentage pointsa€!

<https://drive.google.eom/file/d/lH2XWd5WPqRPeBrlqbWMQfrO3pryxBZ2H/view>

• Zach Carter: The Second Death of Milton Friedman 
<https://zacharydcarter.substack.eom/p/milton-friedman>

• Wikipedia: Archpriest Avvakum <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avvakum>

• Marshall Berman: All Thata€™ s Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity <https 
://www.google .com/books/edition/All_that_is_Solid_Melts_Into_Air/mox 1 y wiyhtgC>

o Marx, Modernism, & Modernization 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/berman-marx-modernism-%26-moderniza
tion.pdf>

o In the Forest of Symbols: Notes on Modernism in New York 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/berman-notes-on-modernism-in-new-yo
rk.pdf>

•  LECTURE NOTES: Feminism & Demography: A lecture I am now happy enough to let this into the 
wilda€”but subject to revision: I will not stand by anything if questioned sharply and harshly. 
What I am
interested in is finding out: (a) Is it right? (b) Does it hit the right notes? Last Edited 
2021a€“06a€“18 :: 6459 wordsa€l 
<https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/draft-lecture-notes-feminism-and>

• LECTURE NOTES: Adam Smith: It is really too bad I do not get to teach this stuff regularly... 
6696 wordsa€! <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/lecture-notes-adam-smith>

• Stephen S. Cohen, J. Bradford DeLong, & John Zysman (2000): Tools for Thought: What Is New and 
Important About the a€ ceE-conomya€EJ <https ://braddelong .substack, 
com/p/hoisted-from-the-archives-
stephen>

• Brad DeLong & Peter Leyden (2015): Are We Approaching a€~Peak Humana€™ 
?<https://braddelong.substack.com/p/hoisted-from-e-archives-from-2015>

<https://delong .typepad ,com/delong_ long, form/2015/11 /are- 
we-approaching-peak-human-the-honest-broker-for-the- week-of-november-9-2015 ,html>

•  Andrew Marvell: An Horatian Ode upon Cromwella€™ s Return from Ireland: a€~Though justice 
against fate complain/And plead the ancient rights in vain;/But those do hold or break/As men are 
strong or
weaka€! 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/44683/an-horatian-ode-upon-cromwells-return-from-ireland>

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Paragraphs:

What do we mean when we say that a€oethe plague years will pack between one and two decades of 
digital transformation into a very short timea€D?

Steven Sinofsky: Disruption at Work: Ita€™ s More than just WFH: a€~The structure and design of 
corporations are rooted in everything that happened after WWII from an influx of labor, growth in
housing, rise of computing, and even the militarya€!. When we look back at 1950a€“2000, we will see 
it as pre-internet or pre-software-defined-business era. Much time was spent taking tech and
applying it to the hard parts of running businesses that were doing what had been done 
inefficiently, at local scale (e.g., accounting and logistics). But those difficult parts were the 
problems defined by
1900a€‘T950, the problems of figuring out just how to design, assemble, and distribute goods. 
Technology was applied to a€ce automate a€D or a€oemake efficienta€D those problems. It has been
incredible. The disruption that took place was a€oescalea€na€”corporations brought capabilities to 
make and distribute things globally, in a newly global marketa€!. The first 25 years of internet, in
hindsight, were an era of a€oeconnectinga€D those innovationsa€!. Walmart took computers and 
software and turned the elaborate processes of selecting merchandise, distributing it, monitoring
sales, and so on and automated it per store. Amazon built one giant store with everythinga€!. That 
is what disruption looks likea€!.

The debate over remote work vs hybrid vs HQ is only part of the picturea€!. PC people set out to 
solve information and programming problems not a€oehow do you do reliability of OS 370 card
readersa€D. In going after the same target (a€oeaccountinga€n) with new architecture, whole new 
economics and solutions appeareda€!. It is said the pandemic pulled forward a decade or more of
a€oedigital transformation^ □. Yes. But what it really is going to be is the equivalent of what 
WWII did to the corporation or the microprocessor to mainframe. The question is not a€oework
remotelyaCD, but what is the very structure of getting things done? We cana€™t see it now, but in 
25 years corporations will run very differently. They will not be 3/5a€™ s HQ with everything the
same.  Why and how?a€l. This is what disruption looks like. It happens slowly at first, then very 
quickly. It seems impossible to imagine a different way to do things, then wea€™re doing things in a
different way. Stay tuned for a whole new way to worka€!

LINK: <https://al6z.com/2021/06/12/disruption-at-work-its-more-than-iust-wfh/>

Freddie from Barmen: 175 years ago Friedrich Engels put his finger on the major flaw in economics 
that Paul Romer has tried to repair over his career:

Friedrich Engels (1843): Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy: "According to the economists, 
the production costs of a commodity consist of three elements: the rent for the piece of land
required to produce the raw material; the capital with its profit, and the wages for the labour 
required for production and manufacture^!. A third factor which the economist does not think 
abouta€“I
mean the mental element of invention, of thought alongside the physical element of sheer labour. 
What has the economist to do with inventiveness? Have not all inventions fallen into his lap without
any effort on his part? Has one of them cost him anything? Why then should he bother about them in 
the calculation of production costs? Land, capital and labour are for him the conditions of wealth,
and he requires nothing else. Science is no concern of his.

What does it matter to him that he has received its gifts through Berthollet, Davy, Liebig, Watt, 
Cartwright, etc.a€“gifts which have benefited him and his production immeasurably? He does not
know                                                                                        how to 
calculate such things; the advances of science go beyond his figures. But in a rational order which 
has gone beyond the division of interests as it is found with the economist, the mental
element certainly belongs among the elements of production and will find its place, too, in 
economics among the costs of production. And here it is certainly gratifying to know that the 
promotion of
science also brings its material reward; to know that a single achievement of science like James 
Watta€™ s steam-engine has brought in more for the world in the first fifty years of its existence 
than
the world has spent on the promotion of science since the beginning of timea€!

LINK: <https://www.bradford-delong .com/2018/11 
/friedrich-engels-1843-outlines-of-a-critique-of-political-economvhttpswwwmarxistsorgarchivemarxwork
s 1844-1 .html>

The two plague years have given very many people who were not aficionados of online information a 
great deal of experience in dealing with ita€’’especially in dealing with the short run gifts that 
are very, very obvious:
people wanting your credit card number to give you a refund, and such. Will this help them develop 
the mental skeptical mechanisms needed to cope with the dopamine-loop misinformation TechnoPrinces 
of Facebook and
elsewhere? Is what we have seen over the past 20 years simply normal human gullibility when faced 
with something new and where they have to learn very quickly? We can hope. But so far it has been a 
vain hope that people
can   be somehow vaccinated against or build immunity to the viruses purveyed by the dopamine-loop 
engagement-maximization misinformation TechnoPrinces:

Matthew Yglesias: a€ceFuturea€ce & the Future of Media: a€~Content distributional is mediated via 
Googlea€! Facebook, anda€! lessera€! smaller networks like Twitter. Alla€! especially
Facebooka€! deci[ded]a€! to give maximum visibility to content that is maximally engaginga€!. 
Engagement-maximization mostly boosts rightwing populists pushing pessimistic negative-sum
worldviews while giving a secondary boost to leftwing populists pushing a different set of 
pessimistic negative-sum worldviews. Oops! Peter Thiela€! deeply involved with Facebooka€! [thinks]
billionaires cana€! ride in the slipstream of conservative populism, crush electoral democracya€! 
and then keep the flame of technological progress alive as a kind of esoteric knowledge. I dona€™t
think  that worksa€!

LINK: <https://www.slowboring .com/p/future-media>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


Facebooka€! deci[ded]a€! to give maximum visibility to content that is maximally engaginga€!. 
Engagement-maximization mostly boosts rightwing populists pushing pessimistic negative-sum
worldviews while giving a secondary boost to leftwing populists pushing a different set of 
pessimistic negative-sum worldviews. Oops! Peter Thiela€! deeply involved with Facebooka€! [thinks]
billionaires cana€! ride in the slipstream of conservative populism, crush electoral democracya€! 
and then keep the flame of technological progress alive as a kind of esoteric knowledge. I dona€™t
think that worksa€!

LINK: <https://www.slowboring.com/p/future-media>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

