The real place where this will be deployed is over at chttp ://equitablegro wth,org>. I put it here 
in case you want an advance looka€!

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1. Once more out of my wheelhouse. Well, that January 6 was a very interesting Feast of the 
Epiphany, wasna€™ t it? In the story, the Magi brought gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh to 
the newly-born Anointed One. In 2021 the MAGAa€”a€oeAmerican patriotsa€D, in the words of First 
Daughter Ivanka Trumpa€’’brought riot and destruction to the U.S. Capitol, which was invaded and 
ransacked for the first time since the British occupation of
Washington in the War of 1812.

On the one hand, the United States tradition of a peaceful transfer of power instituted by 
President John Adams in 1801 has now been broken by President Donald Trump: at least five people 
are dead.

On the other hand, the number of rioters making the assault is described by Wikipedia as being only 
in the a€cehundredsa€Da€”albeit with a follow-on curious crowd wandering around inside the Capitol 
taking photographs, some of whom spent their time collecting souvenirs. It seems much more a 
failure of policing. But the role played by Trump, Trump appointees, and the Trump administration 
in delaying reinforcement support to the U.S. Capitol police has
not been explained. Neither has the bypassing of the chain of command and the approval of 
reinforcement support not by Trump but by Vice President Pence been explained. Perhaps we have a 
soft invocation of the XXV Amendment here. Perhaps not.

I have some preliminarya€”and quite probably wronga€’’thoughts on why the mob did what it did, with 
a very small number of well-equipped would-be terrorists, a much larger number of unequipped 
violent rioters, and a supportive crowd of perhaps a thousand or so willing to go along:

Brad DeLong: Why Storm the Capitol Building & Then Do Nothing But Take 
SeZ/ies?https://braddelong.substack.com/p/whv-storm-the-capitol-building-and: a€~Suppose that you 
believed that the President of the United States was a serious person, rather than a demented, 
lying clown... was telling the truth[?]... What would you conclude?... That you should march down 
to the Capitol, and get in their face, and so give Vice President Pence, Majority Leader
McConnell, and all of the senators in the Republican caucus who were not the brave thirteen the 
backbone to halt the certification, send the fake certificates back to the states, and ask the 
states to send the real certificates. And you would be willing to push past police, break windows, 
ascend scaffolding, and keep pushing as long as you could to get into the face of the legislators 
and give them backbone.

And you would succeed.

But then you would find that, even though you had done your job, you still had not given the 
senators backbonea€”that in fact your actions caused the number of a€cebravea€D senators to fall in 
half, to seven. (But do note that you would neither increase nor decrease the numbers of the 130 
Republican House caucus members on your sidea€’’although it is not clear how many of those voted 
for the objections just because they knew they were not going to pass).
And then you would go home, puzzleda€!

2. Attend the launch of our Ideas to Boost Wages in the New Economy book after lunch (EST) on Th 
Jan 14:

Equitable Growth: Ideas to Boost Wages in the New Economy: Ten Essays on Raising Wages for U.S. 
Worfcershttps://equitablegrowth.org/event/ideas-to-boost-wages-in-the-new-economv-ten-essays-on-rais
ing-wages-for-u-s-workers/: a€~When: January 14,2021 2:30PM - 4:00PM. Where: Event will be virtual 
and not held in person, The Washington Center for Equitable Growth, 15th Street Northwest, 
Washington, DC, USA. The
Washington Center for Equitable Growth will hold a launch event for a new essay series on how to 
raise wages on January 14,2021, from 2:30 p.m. a€“ 4 p.m. EST. The forthcoming book collecting the 
series, Ideas to Boost Wages in the New Economy, features 10 essays by leading scholars on policies 
to boost wages for U.S. workers by addressing underlying structures and dynamics in our economy.

The seriesa€’’developed in partnership with the Institute for Research on Labor and Employment at 
the University of California, Berkeley and with funding from the Bernard and Anne Spitzer 
Charitable Trusta€’’guides policymakers on how to deliver broadly shared economic prosperity by 
making wages a key outcome to structural economic policy at the federal and state levels. The 
virtual event will include a series of fireside chats to
discuss how to reimagine the U.S. economy so that workers are able to share in the value that they 
create, highlighting policy priorities and proposals to balance power and foster an equitable 
economy.

This conference will feature three essay authors: loana Marinescu, Assistant Professor of 
Economics, University of Pennsylvania, on addressing market concentration and employersa€™ ability 
to undercut wages. Jesse Rothstein, Professor of Public Policy and Economics, University of 
California, Berkeley, and Faculty Director, California Policy Lab, on supporting policies to 
broadly share economic risks. Andria Smythe, Assistant
Professor of Economics, Howard University, on making higher education more accessible. Register for 
the launch eventa€!

3. Reread on how race amplifies class by super-amplifying blockages to upward economic mobility. I 
used to think, back in the late 1970s, that the African-American economic trajectory was like the 
standard immigrant economic trajectory if you set the clock so that the migration that counted was 
the Great Migration after World War II from the rural U.S. south to the urban U.S. north. That was 
just completely wrong. And stupid:

Bradley Hardy & Trevon Logan: Race & the Lack of Intergenerational Economic Mobility in the United 
Stateshttps^/equitablegrowth.org/race-and-the-lack-of-intergenerational-economic-mobility-in-the-uni
ted-states/: a€~Key Takeaways: The evidence: U.S. intergenerational economic mobilitya€’’the 
likelihood that children achieve a higher standard of living than the household in which they were 
reareda€’’varies considerably by
race and ethnicity. There are significant racial and gender differences in mobility that exacerbate 
racial differences in other areas such as housing, education, and health. The solutions: Policy 
remedies for persistently low intergenerational economic mobility include more equitable housing 
and educational opportunities, better income security and wealth accumulation, and investments to 
improve school quality, lower crime, and
encourage private-sector amenities to improve infrastructure in the poorest neighborhoods^!

4. It was a disaster of a jobs report for Decembera€”the absence of lockdowns did not keep the 
coronavirus from sending the economy back into recession, as people got scared. Kate Bahn and 
Carmen Sanchez Cumming have the receipts:

Kate Bahn & Carmen Sanchez Cumming: _Equitable GrowthaC™ s Jobs Day Graphs: December 2020 Report 
Edition _ 
https://equitablegrowth.org/equitable-growths-iobs-dav-graphs-ianuary-2020-report-edition-2/: a€~On 
January 8th, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics released new data on the U.S. labor market during 
the month of December. Below are five graphs compiled by Equitable Growth staff highlighting 
important trends
in the dataa€!

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere

1. Again, out of our wheelhouse. But very important to note that Trump administration national 
security bureaucratsa€”and Republican leaders up to Senate Majority Leader McConnella€”are acting 
as they would act if indeed further violent attempts to disrupt the transfer of power to the Biden 
administration are being planned by Trump and his supporters:

Erin Banco & Asawin Suebsaeng: Trump Officials Rush to Keep Him From Sparking Another Conflicta€”at 
Home or 
AfcroaJhttps://www.thedailvbeast.com/after-inciting-capitol-riot-trump-whines-to-advisers-whv-cant-i
-tweet?ref=scroll: a€~Trump is increasingly unhinged. Top national security officials are trying to 
keep the whole world from paying the price: High-ranking national security officials have spent the 
last 24 hours
scrambling to figure out how to keep their commander-in-chief, Donald Trump, from inciting further 
violence at home to spilling national secrets to sparking last-minute confrontations with 
international foes... fears inside the Pentagon that the president will do or say something that 
effectively throws the U.S. into a military confrontation with another country... anxieties in the 
intelligence apparatus that Trump will divulge classified
intelligence on his way out....

a€oeThis isna€™ t a hypothetical anymore,a€D said one senior administration official. a€oeThis is 
real. What happened yesterday changed the calculus. People are concerned about [the presidents™ s] 
state of mindSD... Several high-ranking national security and White House officials were on the 
edge of resigning.  Several did step down, including deputy national security adviser Matt 
Pottinger. But after a series of calls from

prominent GOP lawmakers, including Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-KY), leading national security officials 
decided to stay in office, at least for the time being, in order to preserve cohesiveness but also 
to provide safeguards in the coming weeks. One of those individuals asked to stay on is national 
security adviser Robert Oa€™ Brien....

For those who have decided to stay on, their main focus is preventing President Trump from pushing 
the country further into chaos.  Officials have contacted leading lawmakers on Capitol Hill to 
informally brief them about the situation, according to two congressional aides familiar with the 
matter. a€oeThe president was trying to stage a coup. There was little chance of it happening, but 
there was enough chance that the former defense

secretaries had to put out that letter, which was the final nail through that effort. They 
prevented the military from being involved in any coup attempt. But instead, Trump tried to incite 
it himself,a€D said Fiona Hill, Trumpa€™ s former top Russia adviser. a€oeThis could have turned 
into a full-blown coup had he had any of those key institutions following him. Just because it 
failed or didna€™ t succeed doesna€™t mean it wasna€™t


real.a€D

Defense and intelligence officials have discussed attempting to prevent the president and his 
loyalists at the Pentagona€’’especially Kash Patel, the chief of staff to Acting Defense Secretary 
Chris Millera€”from tampering with classified information or carrying out their own political 
agendas that could threaten the security of the United States, three currently-serving senior 
officials told The Daily Beast.  Part of the problem, officials

said, is that Trumpa€™ s inner circle has been even further cut off from the rest of the 
administration. And those who are left and are still communicating with him are a€oenot going to 
rock the boat,a€D one senior official said. a€oeThere is no one to tell the truth to him at all 
anymore,a€D another former senior national security official said. a€oeThata€™ s the problem. Even 
if they did, he wouldna€™ t listen.a€D...
In the past 24 hours, several senior administration officials have quietly sought to tamp down 
internal chatter of invoking the 25th Amendment... motivated in part by... concerns that more talk, 
even if fleeting, of the 25th amendment could further enrage Trump and cause him to tweet or 
announce to his extremist fans that they should fight against that as well....

Joe Grogan, who was the top White House domestic policy adviser to Trump until May of last year 
didna€™ t exude confidence about certain former colleagues who are still advising the president 
during this crisis, bluntly describing some current aides surrounding Trump as a€cepsycho[s]a€Da€l

2. A very interestinga€”and I think smarta€”point from the highly intelligent Adam Ozimek. Larry 
Summers was half right, and half wrong. $2000 checks would be fine, but not right now. They should 
be issued after vaccination has reached the critical point and when the division of labor is 
reuniting in its new pattern. Then is when we want to see people spend their money in the sectors 
where employment will be buoyant in the future:

Adam Ozimek: Quick Thread

Adam Ozimek @ModeledBehavior

Quick thread on the why and how of fiscal stimulus given the state of the economy. First it's 
important to understand the size of the damage. We have *still* lost more jobs than the worst of 
the Great Recession. That's a remarkable level of job loss (chart from @crampell).

How this recession compares to previous ones

Percent change in employment since most recent peak.


-5%

•10%

-15%

Where
we are
now

Other post­

World War II

recessions                    Great Recession

and subsequent
recovery

30       40        50        60      70 months

Months since the last employment peak

1:56 PM r™ Jan 8,2021

65Likes23Retweets

: a€~The why and how of fiscal stimulus given the state of the economy. First it's important to 
understand the size of the damage. We have still lost more jobs than the worst of the Great 
Recession.  Now it's true, there are a lot of ways that this recession is a lot less damaging than 
the Great Recession. The housing market is fine, household and business balance sheets have been to 
a significant extent bailed out by massive amounts of

relief. That is all very good. We also have a lot of pent us savings, which should be released when 
the pandemic is over. A lot of the job loss is also temporary, a business is still there, there 
customers will be back, but they are at 30% staff be of the pandemic. That all suggests fast 
bounceback.

However, 2.1 million workers who have lost their jobs post-pandemic say their job loss is 
permanent. This can be from business resizing or the elevated level of business failure in some 
sectors. Either way, you cannot put that back in the box quickly. So even if we have a lot of 
temporary job loss bounce back as the pandemic ends, and we have pent up savings being released, I 
don't think we should assume the recovery will simply be
self-correcting at an efficient speed. 2.1 million permanent lost jobs is a lost, and we businesses 
to create new jobs there. In addition, we have all the population growth that would have translated 
to new jobs that we haven't created. That's probably another 1 million at least.

So does this call for fiscal stimulus? The truth is we are in brand new macroeconomic territory 
here. We have never paused the economy for an entire year, and attempted to fill the gap with 
federal spending. I think it would be a serious error lacking in humility to jus assume the economy 
will self correct and make up the 3 million or more jobs we need it to create           in a quick 
manner. What's more, the costs are entirely asymmetric here. If
somehow the economy miraculously creates 3 million NEW jobs (not just the old ones coming back) 
overnight and we do fiscal stimulus, guess what? We still weren't at full employment in 2019. The 
risk of overheating is low.

But while I think the totality of the evidence calls for fiscal stimulus, I think when is very very 
important. If we send out $2,000 checks this month it will be pushing on a string. We should wait 
to send out fiscal stimulus when the pandemic is over. Ironically Larry Summers had this half 
right. Stimulus that leads another          $300 to be spent at home depot, or bidsup newhome 
prices, will not be  putting demand into  the parts of the economy
that need it. The checks should come when the pandemic is over, so they can supercharge pent up 
demand for the service sector which is where the permanent job loss & business failure has happened 
and thus new job creation is going to be concentrateda€!

3. And this is very smart from EPIa€™ s Heidi Shierholz:

Heidi Shierholz: Grim Findings


Heidi Shierholz @hshierholz

Another grim finding is that we are down 1.4 million state and local government jobs over the last 
10 monthsa€”most of it (more than 1.0 million) in education. THIS IS A MINDBOGGLING UNFORCED ERROR. 
Fortunately, given the new senate, Congress can pass aid to state & local govts. 5/
2:20 PM r™ Jan 8,2021

29Likes 18Retweets

: a€~Here we are, astonishingly, at the first #JobsDay of 2021. As we are all taking stock of where 
things stand in our democracy, ita€™ s a moment to also take stock of where things stand in the 
labor market, after 2020. Brace yourselves. After months of slowing gains, we lost 140,000 jobs in 
December as the virus surged. The labor market is in turmoil. We have nearly 10 million fewer jobs 
than we did 10 months ago. Further, in the
year before the recession, we added 194,000 jobs per month on average, so from February to 
December, we could have added around 1.9 million jobs. That means the total gap in the labor market 
right now is on the order of 11.8 million jobs. THIS is the shape of the recovery Biden will be 
inheriting. Another grim finding is that we are down 1.4 million state and local government jobs 
over the last 10 monthsa€”most of it (more than 1.0
million) in education. THIS IS A MINDBOGGLING UNFORCED ERROR. Fortunately, given the new senate, 
Congress can pass aid to state & local govternmentsa€!

4.1 think Joe Gagnon is being very smart here, and my almost always wise teacher Olivier 
Blanchard... not so much here. A very brief twitter discussion:

Joseph Gagnon @GagnonMacro

@delong @ojblanchardl I think that intersection could be extending $300 weekly unemployment 
supplement. Might be doable with 50 votes. But it is not clear that negotiations will lead to this 
particular either-or. Depending on alternatives, I could support doing both.
1:12 PM r™ Jan 8,2021

1 Like 1 Retweet

Olivier Blanchard: 'The good and the bad of tweeter: Me: If we spend money, may make sense to try 
to give it to those who need it. (sounds trivial/reasonable to me...) Choir (1.5 m impressions): 
Communist, imbecile, academic (not a compliment), ignorant, economics is a garbage science, and 
worse.'

Brad DeLong: 'I repeat: I too see many better things to do A%an $2000 checks. I also see many 
things AMt could get 10 Republican votes in A34e senate and so clear A34e filibuster. I am not sure 
I see an intersection. Do you see an intersection? If you do, please say what. If you don't, please 
say so.'

Joseph Gagnon: 'I think that intersection could be extending $300 weekly unemployment supplement. 
Might be doable with 50 votes. But it is not clear that negotiations will lead to this particular 
either-or. Depending on alternatives, I could support doing both...

5. Leta€™ s shift gears, and look at the bright sidea€”the sunny side of things, in the long run at 
least:

Noah Smith: Why I'm so Excited About Solar & Batteries 
https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/why-im-so-excited-about-solar-and: a€~In the 19th century we 
switched to coal... in the 20th century we upgraded to oil.  After World War 2, a global extraction 
regime and price controls allowed us to keep cheap oil flowing. That ended with the Oil Shocks of 
the 70s. And though oil became cheaper again in the 80s and 90s, it never attained

its former lows, or its low volatility. Then in the 00s it got expensive again.... We didna€™ t get 
anything better than oil during this time....

More expensive energy makes physical innovation harder in every way.... This stagnation in energy 
technology almost certainly contributed to the productivity slowdown of the 1970s.... Why didna€™t 
bits fill the gap?... IT did drive the re-acceleration of productivity that began in the late 80s 
and continued through the early 00s.... But around 2005... that productivity growth faded.  Some 
have argued that digital services are

substantially undervalued in our economic production statistics....

Physical technology is less a€oeskill-biaseda€n than IT, meaning that pretty much anyone can be a 
factory worker but only a few people can use computers productively and effectively... [or] IT 
simply touches less of our lives than energy does. a€ceBitsa€n innovation sometimes drives fast 
productivity growth, and sometimes doesna€™t.a€!

The cost declines in solar and batteries a€” and to a lesser extent, in wind and other storage 
technologiesa€’’comprise a true technological revolution.  And therea€™ s no end in sight to this 
revolution. New fundamental advances like solid state lithium-ion batteries and next-generation 
solar cells seem within reach, which will kick off another virtuous cycle of deployment, learning 
curves, and cost decreasesa€!

6. Matt Notowidigdo does this as a tradition. And it is great!:

Matt Notowidigdo: 10 Favorite Economics Papers Published in 2020

Just under the wire again, but I continue my annual tradition — my 10 favorite economics papers 
published in 2020, ordered alphabetically [Was pretty tough this year; might have to do an 
"honorable mention" list in January...]
3:52 PM r™ Dec 31,2020

700Likesl38Retweets

: a€~Just under the wire again, but I continue my annual traditiona€”my 10 favorite economics 
papers published in 2020, ordered alphabetically. [Was pretty tough this year; might have to do an 
"honorable mention" list in January...]

1)       ... whether immigration responds to the generosity of a country's welfare benefits.... 
Using administrative data from Denmark, paper reports large changes in flow of immigrants from 
outside the EU in response to policy that reduced welfare benefits for non-EU immigrants, but not 
EU immigrants....

2) Sebastian Bradley & Naomi Feldman study the economic effects of an increase in tax salience 
coming from a 2012 US DOT mandate that airline fares presented to consumers must incorporate all 
taxes & fees.  Prior to the DOT mandate, essentially all of the taxes & fees were passed on to 
consumers, but after the mandate pass-through falls by ~75%. Increasing tax salience thus led to a 
substantial reduction in the incidence of airline

taxes on consumers....

3) Amitabh Chandra & Douglas Staiger study hospital-level variation in heart attack treatments. One 
key finding is that many hospitals are overusing expensive heart attack treatments, and as a result 
there are marginal treated patients who would have had better outcomes if they had instead received 
less-intensive care.

4)       ... how the acquisition of independent dialysis facilities by larger chains affects 
patient treatment decisions and health outcomes.... Authors conclude "along almost every dimension 
we measure, patients fare worse at the target facility after acquisition"....

5)       ... how job promotions affect the probability of divorce and find large increases for 
women, but not for men.... One thing I remember from their presentation is that many in audience 
were frustrated with the results, but some older women had very different reactions....

6)       ... the effects of different types of mortgage modifications on default and consumption... 
"liquidity effects » wealth effects" for distressed borrowers.... Principal reductions that do not 
include short-term payment reductions are unlikely to be effective in reducing mortgage 
defaults....

7)       ... the "folk wisdom" in labor economics that identification... can be achieved by 
assuming exogeneity of initial industry employment shares... using pre-existing variation in local 
industry employment....

8) Katrine Jakobsen, Kristian Jakobsen, Henrik Kleven, & Gabriel Zucman study the effects of wealth 
taxes in Denmark using a difference-in-differences design.... Wealth taxes have substantial effects 
on taxable wealth, especially at the top of the wealth distribution, with a long-run elasticity of 
taxable wealth (with respect to the after-tax rate) of 0.77 for the moderately wealthy & 1.15 for 
the very wealthy....

9)       ... the earnings losses of displaced workers using matched employer-employee data from the 
state of Washington.... Most of the earnings losses from displacement come from reductions in wages 
rather than from not ending up back in the same kinds of firms.... All of the main results are the 
exact opposite of what I would have expected....

10)       ... a large-scale financial aid program in Colombia (Ser Pilo Paga) that targeted 
extremely high-achieving students in poor households and they find large increases in college 
enrollment.... The program virtually eliminated the SES-enrollment gradient among high-achieving 
students in the top decile of the test score distribution...

7. Very interesting evidence that stimulus (as opposed to income support) spending should wait 
until after the virus plague has been brought under control:

Alan Auerbach, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Peter B. McCrory, & Daniel Murphy: Fiscal Multipliers in the 
COVID19      Zonhttps://www.aeaweb.org/conference/2021/preliminary/1428: a€~In response to the 
record-breaking COVID19 recession, many governments have adopted unprecedented fiscal stimuli. 
While countercyclical fiscal policy is effective in fighting conventional recessions, little is 
known about the effectiveness of
fiscal policy in the current environment with widespread shelter-in-place (a€celockdowna€D) 
policies and the associated considerable limits on economic activity. Using detailed regional 
variation in economic conditions, lockdown policies, and U.S. government spending, we document that 
the effects of government spending were stronger during the peak of the pandemic recession, but 
only in cities that were not subject to strong stay-

at-home orders. We examine mechanisms that can account for our evidence and place our findings in 
the context of other recent evidence from microdataa€!


: a€~Here we are, astonishingly, at the first #JobsDay of 2021. As we are all taking stock of where 
things stand in our democracy, ita€™ s a moment to also take stock of where things stand in the 
labor market, after 2020. Brace yourselves. After months of slowing gains, we lost 140,000 jobs in 
December as the virus surged. The labor market is in turmoil. We have nearly 10 million fewer jobs 
than we did 10 months ago. Further, in the
year before the recession, we added 194,000 jobs per month on average, so from February to 
December, we could have added around 1.9 million jobs. That means the total gap in the labor market 
right now is on the order of 11.8 million jobs. THIS is the shape of the recovery Biden will be 
inheriting. Another grim finding is that we are down 1.4 million state and local government jobs 
over the last 10 monthsa€”most of it (more than 1.0
million) in education. THIS IS A MINDBOGGLING UNFORCED ERROR. Fortunately, given the new senate, 
Congress can pass aid to state & local govternmentsaCI

4.1 think Joe Gagnon is being very smart here, and my almost always wise teacher Olivier 
Blanchard... not so much here. A very brief twitter discussion:

Joseph Gagnon @GagnonMacro

@delong @ojblanchardl I think that intersection could be extending $300 weekly unemployment 
supplement. Might be doable with 50 votes. But it is not clear that negotiations will lead to this 
particular either-or. Depending on alternatives, I could support doing both.
1:12 PM r™ Jan 8,2021

1 Like 1 Retweet

Olivier Blanchard: 'The good and the bad of tweeter: Me: If we spend money, may make sense to try 
to give it to those who need it. (sounds trivial/reasonable to me...) Choir (1.5 m impressions): 
Communist, imbecile, academic (not a compliment), ignorant, economics is a garbage science, and 
worse.'

Brad DeLong: 'I repeat: I too see many better things to do A^an $2000 checks. I also see many 
things A%t could get 10 Republican votes in A34e senate and so clear A34e filibuster. I am not sure 
I see an intersection. Do you see an intersection? If you do, please say what. If you don't, please 
say so.'

Joseph Gagnon: 'I think that intersection could be extending $300 weekly unemployment supplement. 
Might be doable with 50 votes. But it is not clear that negotiations will lead to this particular 
either-or. Depending on alternatives, I could support doing both...

5. Leta€™ s shift gears, and look at the bright sidea€”the sunny side of things, in the long run at 
least:

Noah Smith: Why I'm so Excited About Solar & Batteries 
https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/why-im-so-excited-about-solar-and: a€~In the 19th century we 
switched to coal... in the 20th century we upgraded to oil.  After World War 2, a global extraction 
regime and price controls allowed us to keep cheap oil flowing. That ended with the Oil Shocks of 
the 70s. And though oil became cheaper again in the 80s and 90s, it never attained

its former lows, or its low volatility. Then in the 00s it got expensive again.... We didna€™ t get 
anything better than oil during this time....

More expensive energy makes physical innovation harder in every way.... This stagnation in energy 
technology almost certainly contributed to the productivity slowdown of the 1970s.... Why didna€™t 
bits fill the gap?... IT did drive the re-acceleration of productivity that began in the late 80s 
and continued through the early 00s.... But around 2005... that productivity growth faded.  Some 
have argued that digital services are

substantially undervalued in our economic production statistics....

Physical technology is less a€oeskill-biaseda€n than IT, meaning that pretty much anyone can be a 
factory worker but only a few people can use computers productively and effectively... [or] IT 
simply touches less of our lives than energy does. a€ceBitsa€n innovation sometimes drives fast 
productivity growth, and sometimes doesna€™t.a€!

The cost declines in solar and batteries a€” and to a lesser extent, in wind and other storage 
technologiesa€’’comprise a true technological revolution.  And therea€™ s no end in sight to this 
revolution. New fundamental advances like solid state lithium-ion batteries and next-generation 
solar cells seem within reach, which will kick off another virtuous cycle of deployment, learning 
curves, and cost decreasesa€!

6. Matt Notowidigdo does this as a tradition. And it is great!:

Matt Notowidigdo: 10 Favorite Economics Papers Published in 2020

Just under the wire again, but I continue my annual tradition — my 10 favorite economics papers 
published in 2020, ordered alphabetically [Was pretty tough this year; might have to do an 
"honorable mention" list in January...]
3:52 PM r™ Dec 31,2020

700Likesl38Retweets

: a€~Just under the wire again, but I continue my annual traditiona€”my 10 favorite economics 
papers published in 2020, ordered alphabetically. [Was pretty tough this year; might have to do an 
"honorable mention" list in January...]

1)       ... whether immigration responds to the generosity of a country's welfare benefits.... 
Using administrative data from Denmark, paper reports large changes in flow of immigrants from 
outside the EU in response to policy that reduced welfare benefits for non-EU immigrants, but not 
EU immigrants....

2) Sebastian Bradley & Naomi Feldman study the economic effects of an increase in tax salience 
coming from a 2012 US DOT mandate that airline fares presented to consumers must incorporate all 
taxes & fees.  Prior to the DOT mandate, essentially all of the taxes & fees were passed on to 
consumers, but after the mandate pass-through falls by ~75%. Increasing tax salience thus led to a 
substantial reduction in the incidence of airline

taxes on consumers....

3) Amitabh Chandra & Douglas Staiger study hospital-level variation in heart attack treatments. One 
key finding is that many hospitals are overusing expensive heart attack treatments, and as a result 
there are marginal treated patients who would have had better outcomes if they had instead received 
less-intensive care.

4)       ... how the acquisition of independent dialysis facilities by larger chains affects 
patient treatment decisions and health outcomes.... Authors conclude "along almost every dimension 
we measure, patients fare worse at the target facility after acquisition"....

5)       ... how job promotions affect the probability of divorce and find large increases for 
women, but not for men.... One thing I remember from their presentation is that many in audience 
were frustrated with the results, but some older women had very different reactions....

6)       ... the effects of different types of mortgage modifications on default and consumption... 
"liquidity effects » wealth effects" for distressed borrowers.... Principal reductions that do not 
include short-term payment reductions are unlikely to be effective in reducing mortgage 
defaults....

7)       ... the "folk wisdom" in labor economics that identification... can be achieved by 
assuming exogeneity of initial industry employment shares... using pre-existing variation in local 
industry employment....

8) Katrine Jakobsen, Kristian Jakobsen, Henrik Kleven, & Gabriel Zucman study the effects of wealth 
taxes in Denmark using a difference-in-differences design.... Wealth taxes have substantial effects 
on taxable wealth, especially at the top of the wealth distribution, with a long-run elasticity of 
taxable wealth (with respect to the after-tax rate) of 0.77 for the moderately wealthy & 1.15 for 
the very wealthy....

9)       ... the earnings losses of displaced workers using matched employer-employee data from the 
state of Washington.... Most of the earnings losses from displacement come from reductions in wages 
rather than from not ending up back in the same kinds of firms.... All of the main results are the 
exact opposite of what I would have expected....

10)       ... a large-scale financial aid program in Colombia (Ser Pilo Paga) that targeted 
extremely high-achieving students in poor households and they find large increases in college 
enrollment.... The program virtually eliminated the SES-enrollment gradient among high-achieving 
students in the top decile of the test score distribution...

7. Very interesting evidence that stimulus (as opposed to income support) spending should wait 
until after the virus plague has been brought under control:

Alan Auerbach, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Peter B. McCrory, & Daniel Murphy: Fiscal Multipliers in the 
COVID19 Recessionhttps://www.aeaweb.org/conference/2021/preliminary/1428: a€~In response to the 
record-breaking COVID19 recession, many governments have adopted unprecedented fiscal stimuli. 
While countercyclical fiscal policy is effective in fighting conventional recessions, little is 
known about the effectiveness of
fiscal policy in the current environment with widespread shelter-in-place (a€celockdowna€D) 
policies and the associated considerable limits on economic activity. Using detailed regional 
variation in economic conditions, lockdown policies, and U.S. government spending, we document that 
the effects of government spending were stronger during the peak of the pandemic recession, but 
only in cities that were not subject to strong stay-
at-home orders. We examine mechanisms that can account for our evidence and place our findings in 
the context of other recent evidence from microdataa€!

8.1 find this very surprising, and am eager to dig deeper into it. I will not claim to understand 
it yet, but I think it is potentially very important:

Martha Bailey, Thomas Helgerman, & Bryan Stuart: The Impact of the 1963 Equal Pay Act on the Gender 
Gaphttps ://www.aeaweb .org/conference/2021/preliminary/1388: a€~The 1963 Equal Pay Act mandated 
equal pay for equal work for individuals covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act. Drawing on an 
empirical strategy used in the minimum wage literature, we exploit variation in the a€cebitea€D of 
the Act due to the pre­
existing gender pay gap in the same occupation, industry, and Census region. Consistent with the 
Equal Pay Act binding, the results show that womena€™ s wages increased more sharply in more 
affected jobs after implementation. However, women in more affected jobs also experienced 
substantially larger employment reductions by 1970. The resulting reshuffling of women from higher 
wage (and higher gender gap) jobs to lower
paying (and lower gender gap) jobs offset womena€™ s aggregate wage gains entirely. The result was 
negligible changes in the aggregate gender gap during the 1960sa€!


8) Katrine Jakobsen, Kristian Jakobsen, Henrik Kleven, & Gabriel Zucman study the effects of wealth 
taxes in Denmark using a difference-in-differences design.... Wealth taxes have substantial effects 
on taxable wealth, especially at the top of the wealth distribution, with a long-run elasticity of 
taxable wealth (with respect to the after-tax rate) of 0.77 for the moderately wealthy & 1.15 for 
the very wealthy....

9)       ... the earnings losses of displaced workers using matched employer-employee data from the 
state of Washington.... Most of the earnings losses from displacement come from reductions in wages 
rather than from not ending up back in the same kinds of firms.... All of the main results are the 
exact opposite of what I would have expected....

10)       ... a large-scale financial aid program in Colombia (Ser Pilo Paga) that targeted 
extremely high-achieving students in poor households and they find large increases in college 
enrollment.... The program virtually eliminated the SES-enrollment gradient among high-achieving 
students in the top decile of the test score distribution...

7. Very interesting evidence that stimulus (as opposed to income support) spending should wait 
until after the virus plague has been brought under control:

Alan Auerbach, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Peter B. McCrory, & Daniel Murphy: Fiscal Multipliers in the 
COVID19 Recessionhttps J.org/conference/2021/preliminary/1428: a€~In response to the 
record-breaking COVID19 recession, many governments have adopted unprecedented fiscal stimuli. 
While countercyclical fiscal policy is effective in fighting conventional recessions, little is 
known about the effectiveness of
fiscal policy in the current environment with widespread shelter-in-place (a€celockdowna€D) 
policies and the associated considerable limits on economic activity. Using detailed regional 
variation in economic conditions, lockdown policies, and U.S. government spending, we document that 
the effects of government spending were stronger during the peak of the pandemic recession, but 
only in cities that were not subject to strong stay-
at-home orders. We examine mechanisms that can account for our evidence and place our findings in 
the context of other recent evidence from microdataa€!

8.1 find this very surprising, and am eager to dig deeper into it. I will not claim to understand 
it yet, but I think it is potentially very important:

Martha Bailey, Thomas Helgerman, & Bryan Stuart: The Impact of the 1963 Equal Pay Act on the Gender 
Gaphttps ://www.aeaweb .org/conference/2021/preliminary/1388: a€~The 1963 Equal Pay Act mandated 
equal pay for equal work for individuals covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act. Drawing on an 
empirical strategy used in the minimum wage literature, we exploit variation in the a€cebitea€D of 
the Act due to the pre­
existing gender pay gap in the same occupation, industry, and Census region. Consistent with the 
Equal Pay Act binding, the results show that womenaC™ s wages increased more sharply in more 
affected jobs after implementation. However, women in more affected jobs also experienced 
substantially larger employment reductions by 1970. The resulting reshuffling of women from higher 
wage (and higher gender gap) jobs to lower
paying (and lower gender gap) jobs offset womena€™ s aggregate wage gains entirely. The result was 
negligible changes in the aggregate gender gap during the 1960sa€!

