Noah Smith & Brad DeLong’s 30:00 < [Length of Weekly Podcast] < 60:00

<https://api.substack.com/feed/podcast/47874.rss>

Key Insights:

1. Economic arguments against higher taxes that may have been somewhat plausible back in the days 
of 70% or so maximum individual and 40% or so maximum capital gains tax rates simply do not apply 
now.

2. Right-wing parties that don't think they can credibly make the argument that cosseting their 
core constituencies is necessary for rapid economic growth search for some non-economic cleavage in 
which the rich and the right-thinking poor, or the right-colored poor, can be on one side and the 
people who seek a fairer and more equal distribution of income and higher taxes on the rich can be 
put on the othera€”let's all yell about critical race theory, and
maybe they won't pay attention to the fact that we just, you know, take everybody's money.

3. Capital to fund investment is really not a big constraint right nowa€’’incentivizing savings in 
financial assets really is just pushing on a string.

4. Companies with investments that have high societal value in expansion need to be properly 
incentivizeda€’’either by the smell of more profits next year from serving a larger market with 
lower costs of production through larger scale, or through the government paying and so getting 
prices righter than the free market gets them.

5. a€oeDoge coina€D is pronounced with a soft a€cega€D sound.

6. No, Doge coin is not named after the title of the head of state of the Venetian Republic

7. Doge coina€™ s name comes from the Homestar Runner line: a€oel want a dogea€Da€!

8. Hexapodia!

Denmark has the Highest Average Tax Burden on Capital Income in Europe

Average tax burden on capital income in Europe

LT

9%

#1

CZ

19%

#8

SK

15%

#5


14%

AT

26%

#12



CH|_ SI HU GR

34% 19%       13%     21%

#20     #9      #2    #10

Average Tax Burdens on Capital Income

■■■■■■■■■I


Note: Data for 2018 for all countries except Greece, where the data is for 2017.

Source: Author’s calculations based on OECD data.

Lower

Higher

FIGURE 1

Maximum Capital Gains and Individual Income Tax Rate

Tax years 1954-2020

100% i


Sources: US Department of the Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis (2016); Urban-Brookings Tax Policy 
Center calculations.

Note: The maximum rates include the 3.8 percent tax on net investment income (2013-) and adjusts 
for the phaseout of itemized deductions (1991-2009, 2013-
2017).


AJA I).

References:

Len Burman (2021): Biden Would Close Giant Capital Gains LoopholesaC”At Least For The Rich 
<https://www.taxpolicvcenter.org/taxvox/biden-would-close-giant-capital-gains-loopholes-least-rich>

Peter Diamond & James Mirrlees (1971): Optimal Taxation and Public Production I: Production 
Efficiency <https://www.jstor.org/stable/1910538>

Peter Diamond & James Mirrlees (1971): Optimal Taxation and Public Production II: Tax Rules <https 
://assets.aeaweb.org/asset-server/journals/aer/top20/61.3.261-278.pdf>

Ken Judd (1999): Optimal Taxation and Spending in General Competitive Growth Models 
<http://darp.Ise.ac.uk/PapersDB/Judd._(JPubE_99) .pdf>

Paul Krugman (2021): Why DoesndC™ t Cutting Taxes on the Wealthy 
B^r^?<https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/30/opinion/tax-cuts-rich.html>

Jacob Lundberg & Johannes Nathell (2021): Tax Burden on Capital Income: International Comparison 
<https://taxfoundation.org/tax-burden-on-capital-income/>

Robert McClelland (2021): Avoiding Bidena€™ s Proposed Capital Gains Tax Hikes Wona€™ t Be So Easy. 
Or Will It? 
<https://www.taxpolicvcenter.org/taxvox/avoiding-bidens-proposed-capital-gains-tax-hikes-wont-be-so-
easv-or-will-it>

Alicia Munnell (2021): BidendC™ s Plan to Fully Tax Capital Gains Is Good 
PoZfcv<https://www.marketwatch.com/storv/bidens-plan-to-fullv-tax-capital-gains-is-good-policv-11620
658190>

Garrett Watson & Erica York (2021): Capital Gain Rates Under Biden Tax 
PlanchWps://taxfoundation.org/biden-capital-gains-tax-rates/>

Thomas Piketty & Emmanuel Saez (2012): A Theory of Optimal Capital Taxation <http://gesd.free 
,fr/w!7989 .pdf>

Ludwig Straub & Ivan Werning (2020): Positive Long-Run Capital Taxation: Chamley-Judd Revisited 
<https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id= 10.1257/aer.2O 150210>

Tax Foundation (2017): Preliminary Details and Analysis of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act 
<https://taxfoundation.org/final-tax-cuts-and-iobs-act-details-analysis/>

&, of course:

Vernor Vinge: A Fire Upon the Deep <https: //books .google .com/books ?id=fCCWWgZ7d6UC>

<https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/podcast-hexapodia-xiv-the-capital>

