Subscribe now

First:

Manu Saadia: Gaullism at a Crossroads: a€~TroisiA"me Voie was no mere idealistic reveriea€! [but] a 
practical, technocratic plan for Francea€™ s post-war reconstruction. It infused with its idealism 
the sweeping program of the Conseil National de la RA©sistancea€! borrowing] equally from the 
Christian humanism of philosopher Emmanuel Mounier and from economist William Beveridgea€™ s
extremely influential report on social insurancea€!. The experience of the RA©sistance precipitated 
a radical aggiornamento of the French Right. Fighting Nazis and French traitors, and dying side by 
side with Communist militants will completely alter your world-view. The War thus enabled the 
French Right to cede to the pressure of the working class, chiefly represented by the Communists at 
the time. It
made   it amenable to negotiate the reconstruction of France as a welfare State. The reforms of 
1945 and 1946, which enshrined into laws the program of the Conseil National de la RA©sistance, 
were indeed a social revolution^!. Much of what you know and appreciate about todaya€™ s France 
came out of that revolutionary moment: womena€™ s right to vote, nationalization of electrical 
production,
public retirement system, public crA'ches, public healthcare, public transportation, the TGV, 
etca€!. That is the proud heritage of Gaullism, shared in common with the other components of the 
RA©sistance. Ita€™ s not so much De Gaulle that invented the TroisiA'me Voie but rather the 
TroisiA'me Voie that made Gaullism viable as a political force. It created the ideological 
framework for the French Right
to accept liberal democracya€!

LINK:

Gaullism at a crossroads

Ita€™ s a banality to say that a presidential election is about the future. That truism 
nevertheless takes on a lugubrious resonance for those contenders, parties and candidates, who seem 
stuck in the past or are nearing obsolescence. As I argued in a previous posta€!

Read more

a year ago A- 1 like A- MANU

Chris Best & Hamish McKenzie: The Internet Needs Better Rules, Not Stricter Referees: a€~People are 
taking the wrong lessons from the Facebook Papersa€!. The key to a healthier platform is to flip 
the power dynamic: give the people themselves the power to choose what they pay attention to. Let 
the will of the people control their feeds, not the other way around. Instead of removing peoplea€™ 
s
agency by manipulating their attention in favor of the most profitable and provocative content, let 
them seek out what they really value. Other than in extreme cases involving violence or illicit 
activity, people should be allowed to decide for themselves whoa€™ s worth listening to, whata€™ s 
trustworthy, and which direction is punching a€cedown.a€D Beyond being undesirable, relying only on 
top-down
moderation is ineffective: tech companies didna€™ t invent teen insecurity or tribal resentments, 
and they wona€™ t fix those problems through censorship whack-a-mole. There is no world in which 
all vexing views can be banished. And if there were, none of us should want to live in it. There 
will be no perfect internet, but there can be a better one. A healthier internet requires 
overhauling incentives by
putting people back in chargea€!

LINK:


Substack

The internet needs better rules, not stricter referees

The recent Facebook leaks have prompted a torrent of proposals for fixing social mediaa€™ s harmful 
effects on society, including demands for more oversight by company executives, boards, or 
regulators. None of these addresses the core problem of the attention economy, which no amount of 
top-down control can fixa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 260 likes A- 82 comments A- Chris Best and Hamish McKenzie
Share

One Video:


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Gail Carriger: 10 Bookish Hills Upon Which I am Prepared to Die 
<https://gailcarriger.com/2021/09/20/bookish-hills/>

• Jay Bennett: How Many Particles Are in the Observable Universe?'. a€~Numberphile is on the 
casea€! 
<https://www.popularmechanics.com/space/a27259/how-many-particles-are-in-the-entire-universe/>

• Sylvan Lane: Senate Confirms Jerome Powell as Fed Chairman: a€~The final count stood at 
84a€“13a€! 
<https://thehill.com/policy/finance/370329-senate-confirms-ierome-powell-as-fed-chairman?rl=l>

• Rose Wilder Lane: The Making of Herbert Hoover 
<https://archive.org/details/makingofherberth021ane/page/248/mode/2up?q=Chang>

•  Sam Goldheart: 2021 MacBook Pro Teardown: A Glimpse at a Better Timeline: a€~Wea€™re excited to 
tuck into these fruits from a branching 2016 timelinea€”the MacBooks that could have beena€! 
<https://www.ifixit.com/News/54122/macbook-pro-2021-teardown>

• R. H. Coase (1960): The Problem of Social Cost <https: //w w w2 .econ .iastate 
.edu/classes/tsc220/hallam/Coase .pdf>

• Forrest C. Pogue: George C. Marshall: Statesman, 1945a€ 
“7959<https://archive.org/details/georgecmarshalls00pogu/page/236/mode/2up?q=%22election+year%22>

• Noble E. Cunningham (2000): Jefferson vs. Hamilton: Confrontations That Shaped a 
Atozon<https://archive.org/details/thomasjeffersonv00nobl/page/78/mode/2up?q=monarchy>

• Thomas P. Hughes (1989): American Genesis: A Century of Invention & Technological Enthusiasm 
1870a€ “7970<https ://archive .org/details/americangenesiscOOhugh/page/102/mode/2up>

• Wikipedia: 4th Armored Division (France, 7940)<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/4th Armored Division 
(France, 1940)#Formation>

•  Adam Posen: a€™All experience since 2000 in the adv economies I contend disproves that 
asymmetry. Inflation expectations are at least as sticky to the downside as they are to the upside. 
Thata€™ s why a 3% IT is not only good versus the ELB but as a correction to one-sided too low 
risk.1 could of course be wrong, but 20 yrs of data sez go for ita€!

©jasonfurman @erikbryn @nominalthoughts @Zach28150464 But all experience since 2000 in the adv 
economies I contend disproves that asymmetry. Inflation expectations are at least as sticky to the 
downside as they are to the upside. That's why a 3% IT is not only good versus the ELB but as a 
correction to one-sided too low risk 3/4
7:07 PM r™ Nov 11,2021

• Baratunde Thurston: Season 3 of How To Citizen Is Here!: a€~Also, Metatunde?a€!



Season 3 of How To Citizen is here!

Recommentunde

This is me checking out the new Rivian all-electric pickup truck, and clearly Ia€™ ve never been 
more excited in my life. Hello dear one, Ia€™ ve taken a bit of a hiatus from the weekly schedule 
here at Recommentunde as I recalibrate the flux capacitors that power my being. Therea€™ s so much 
to catch up on, but the headline is thisa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 8 likes A- Baratunde Thurston

Sfpvpn Inhnsnn Hnw Dn Ymi Cnnturp Ynur Uunrhps?



Adjacent Possible

How Do You Capture Your Hunches?

[This is the first in a series of documents, available only to paying subscribers, outlining the 
key questions to ask yourself in designing a creative workflow that can help you cultivate your 
ideas, no matter what profession you happen to be in. Each one will include an annotated list of 
tools and essays to help you take what I call a a€oecreative inventorya€D of both the software apps 
and the real-
world habits that shape your idea generation and cultivation. Ia€™ d love to hear more strategies 
in the comments and will keep updating these documents as new possibilities come ina€!

Read more

a year ago A- 8 likes A- 17 comments A- Steven Johnson

Paragraphs:

Gail Carriger: I Blame Jane Austen for 6 Popular Tropes in the Romance Genre: a€~A while ago, I was 
thinking about Jane Austen under the context of romance tropes and identified what I have called, 
ever sincea€! The 6 Austens: [1] Emma ~ Friends to Lovers (or Consanguinity): close friendship 
blossoms into romance (this one is also May/December). [2] Mansfield Park ~ Unrequited Love: X has
loved Y forever, they finally get together. [3] Pride & Prejudice ~ Enemies to Lovers: X and Y 
dislike each other, sparks ensue. [4] Sense & Sensibility ~ Sweet Torture (AKA On the Rocks): X and 
Y are perfect for one another, circumstances tear them apart. [5] Northanger Abby ~ Mistaken 
identity: X willfully misunderstands Y and Ya€™ s intentions. [6] Persuasion ~ Redemption (or 
Reunion): X and Y
have a past, mistakes were made that must be rectifieda€!. I realized, as I was mucking about with 
this post that these are also some of the tropes in romance that I most gravitate towards as a 
reader. I suspect I should blame too much Austen in my formative yearsa€!

LINK: 
<https://gailcarriger.eom/2018/02/14/i-blame-jane-austen-for-6-popular-tropes-in-the-romance-genre-m
v-first-storv-bundle-important-for-writers/>

Wayne Ma: Applea€™ s Road Map for Mac Chips Shows Likely Advantage Over Intel: a€~Applea€™ s third 
generation of Mac processorsa€l Ibiza, Lobos and Palmaa€! look to be an especially big step up from 
the processors Intel is expected to begin shipping around that timea€!. All of the A- and 
M-processors are manufactured for Apple by Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., which has
arguably become Applea€™ s most important technology partnera€!. Apple plans to take a much bigger 
leap with its third-generation processors, some of which will have four dies made using a 
3-nanometer process, that person saida€!. a€oeWith the increased core count and frequency upgrades, 
Apple has a good chance to overtake Intel in the PC space ,a€D said Jania€!. While ita€™ s unclear 
when
Apple products containing the companya€™ s third-generation processors will be released, analysts 
and people familiar with TSMCa€™ s plans expect the company to be able to reliably manufacture 
3-nanometer chips by 2023a€!. Meanwhile, the next Mac Pro, which targets professional users, will 
include a processor with at least two dies based on the Ml Max, as part of a family of 
first-generation
processors code-named Jade. The next MacBook Air and a future iPad will likely contain Applea€™ s 
less powerful version of the companya€™ s second-generation processora€”code-named Statena€!. And 
upcoming MacBook Pros and desktop computers will likely use more powerful versions of Applea€™ s 
second-generation chips, which are part of a family of processors code-named Rhodesa€!. In
April,  the Rhodes chips hit a milestone when Apple finished their physical design and handed them 
off to TSMC for trial production^!

LINK: 
<https://www.theinformation.com/articles/apples-road-map-for-mac-chips-shows-likelv-advantage-over-i
ntel>

Jamelle Bouie: What a€~Structural Racisma€™ Really Means: a€~The 1948 book a€oeCaste, Class, and 
Race: A Study in Social Dynamics,a€D an influential (if now somewhat obscure) work of sociological 
analysis by the Trinidadian scholar Oliver Cromwell Cox. If there is a reason to revisit this 
specific book at this particular moment, it is to remind oneself that the challenge of racism is 
primarily
structural and material, not cultural and linguistic, and that a disproportionate focus on the 
latter can too often obscure the formera€!

LINK: <https ://www.nytimes .com/2021/11/09/opinion/structural-racism ,html>

John Naughton & Robert W. Taylor: Zen and the Art of Research Management: (With apologies to Sun 
Tzu). 1. Hire only the very best people, even if they are cussed. Perhaps especially if they are 
cussed. Your guiding principle should be to employ people who are smarter than you. One superb 
researcher is worth dozens of merely good ones. 2. Once youa€™ ve got them, trust them. Do not 
attempt to
micro-manage talented people. (Remember rule #1.) Set broad goals and leave them to it. Concentrate 
your own efforts on strategy and nurturing the environmental

LINK: <https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~jac22/zen-lab,txt>

Ben Bajarin: The Silicon Big Fiv: a€~Forget FAANG. The most important technology platforms for the 
future are semiconductor platforms. Five companiesa€!. AMD, Intel, Qualcomm, Nvidia, and Applea€!. 
It might seem odd to have Apple included in a list of pure semiconductor companies when the silicon 
they design is not strictly a product in the same sense it is for the rest of the big five. Yet the
unique and proprietary IP Apple brings to a central part of their products computing DNA coupled 
with its significant scale on its devices and platform earns them the right to be included. The 
other four companies are obvious inclusions into any semiconductor industry discussiona€!. Intel: 
Still the market share leader in data center/server and desktop/notebooka€!. Qualcomm: The 
undisputed leader in
wirelessa€!. Nvidia: Nvidiaa€! is responsible for the industry trend of using GPUs for 
general-purpose computinga€!. AMD: isa€! in the unique position of challenging Nvidia and Intel 
from the bottom up with a fully mature CPU and GPU architecture^!. These companies do not just 
design physical semiconductors. All of these companies are actually software companies that create 
computing platforms.
Silicon  is just part of their platform story. This is one of the reasons it is so important to 
recognize the future shaping role these companies playa€!


Adjacent Possible

How Do You Capture Your Hunches?

[This is the first in a series of documents, available only to paying subscribers, outlining the 
key questions to ask yourself in designing a creative workflow that can help you cultivate your 
ideas, no matter what profession you happen to be in. Each one will include an annotated list of 
tools and essays to help you take what I call a a€cecreative inventorya€D of both the software apps 
and the real-
world habits that shape your idea generation and cultivation. Ia€™ d love to hear more strategies 
in the comments and will keep updating these documents as new possibilities come ina€l

Read more

a year ago A- 8 likes A- 17 comments A- Steven Johnson

Paragraphs:

Gail Carriger: I Blame Jane Austen for 6 Popular Tropes in the Romance Genre: a€~A while ago, I was 
thinking about Jane Austen under the context of romance tropes and identified what I have called, 
ever sincea€! The 6 Austens: [1] Emma ~ Friends to Lovers (or Consanguinity): close friendship 
blossoms into romance (this one is also May/December). [2] Mansfield Park ~ Unrequited Love: X has
loved Y forever, they finally get together. [3] Pride & Prejudice ~ Enemies to Lovers: X and Y 
dislike each other, sparks ensue. [4] Sense & Sensibility ~ Sweet Torture (AKA On the Rocks): X and 
Y are perfect for one another, circumstances tear them apart. [5] Northanger Abby ~ Mistaken 
identity: X willfully misunderstands Y and Ya€™ s intentions. [6] Persuasion ~ Redemption (or 
Reunion): X and Y
have a past, mistakes were made that must be rectifieda€!. I realized, as I was mucking about with 
this post that these are also some of the tropes in romance that I most gravitate towards as a 
reader. I suspect I should blame too much Austen in my formative yearsa€!

LINK: 
<https://gailcarriger.com/2018/02/14/i-blame-jane-austen-for-6-popular-tropes-in-the-romance-genre-m
y-first-story-bundle-important-for-writers/>

Wayne Ma: Applea€™ s Road Map for Mac Chips Shows Likely Advantage Over Intel: a€~Applea€™ s third 
generation of Mac processorsa€! Ibiza, Lobos and Palmaa€! look to be an especially big step up from 
the processors Intel is expected to begin shipping around that timea€!. All of the A- and 
M-processors are manufactured for Apple by Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., which has
arguably become Applea€™ s most important technology partnera€!. Apple plans to take a much bigger 
leap with its third-generation processors, some of which will have four dies made using a 
3-nanometer process, that person saida€!. a€oeWith the increased core count and frequency upgrades, 
Apple has a good chance to overtake Intel in the PC space,a€D said Jania€!. While ita€™ s unclear 
when
Apple products containing the companya€™ s third-generation processors will be released, analysts 
and people familiar with TSMCa€™ s plans expect the company to be able to reliably manufacture 
3-nanometer chips by 2023a€!. Meanwhile, the next Mac Pro, which targets professional users, will 
include a processor with at least two dies based on the Ml Max, as part of a family of 
first-generation
processors code-named Jade. The next MacBook Air and a future iPad will likely contain Applea€™ s 
less powerful version of the companya€™ s second-generation processora€”code-named Statena€!. And 
upcoming MacBook Pros and desktop computers will likely use more powerful versions of Applea€™ s 
second-generation chips, which are part of a family of processors code-named Rhodesa€!. In
April, the Rhodes chips hit a milestone when Apple finished their physical design and handed them 
off to TSMC for trial production^!

LINK: 
<https://www.theinformation.com/articles/apples-road-map-for-mac-chips-shows-likely-advantage-over-i
ntel>

Jamelle Bouie: What a€~Structural Racisma€™ Really Means: a€~The 1948 book a€oeCaste, Class, and 
Race: A Study in Social Dynamics,a€D an influential (if now somewhat obscure) work of sociological 
analysis by the Trinidadian scholar Oliver Cromwell Cox. If there is a reason to revisit this 
specific book at this particular moment, it is to remind oneself that the challenge of racism is 
primarily
structural and material, not cultural and linguistic, and that a disproportionate focus on the 
latter can too often obscure the formera€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes.com/2021/ll/09/opinion/structural-racism.html>

John Naughton & Robert W. Taylor: Zen and the Art of Research Management: (With apologies to Sun 
Tzu). 1. Hire only the very best people, even if they are cussed. Perhaps especially if they are 
cussed. Your guiding principle should be to employ people who are smarter than you. One superb 
researcher is worth dozens of merely good ones. 2. Once youa€™ ve got them, trust them. Do not 
attempt to
micro-manage talented people. (Remember rule #1.) Set broad goals and leave them to it. Concentrate 
your own efforts on strategy and nurturing the environmental

LINK: <https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~jac22/zen-lab,txt>

Ben Bajarin: The Silicon Big Fiv: a€~Forget FAANG. The most important technology platforms for the 
future are semiconductor platforms. Five companiesa€!. AMD, Intel, Qualcomm, Nvidia, and Applea€!. 
It might seem odd to have Apple included in a list of pure semiconductor companies when the silicon 
they design is not strictly a product in the same sense it is for the rest of the big five. Yet the
unique and proprietary IP Apple brings to a central part of their products computing DNA coupled 
with its significant scale on its devices and platform earns them the right to be included. The 
other four companies are obvious inclusions into any semiconductor industry discussiona€!. Intel: 
Still the market share leader in data center/server and desktop/notebooka€!. Qualcomm: The 
undisputed leader in
wirelessa€!. Nvidia: Nvidiaa€! is responsible for the industry trend of using GPUs for 
general-purpose computinga€!. AMD: isa€! in the unique position of challenging Nvidia and Intel 
from the bottom up with a fully mature CPU and GPU architecture^!. These companies do not just 
design physical semiconductors. All of these companies are actually software companies that create 
computing platforms.
Silicon  is just part of their platform story. This is one of the reasons it is so important to 
recognize the future shaping role these companies playa€!

LINK: <https://creativestrategies.com/the-silicon-big-five/>

Ryan Avent: Inflation: a€~The carping about inflation really irks me, because Ia€™m not so certain 
that there is. As noted before, consumer prices are up 6.2% over the past 12 months. It is also the 
case that real GDP (adjusted for inflation) is up 5% over the past 12 months, and employment is up 
by about 5.8m jobs. The American economy, notably, has surpassed its pre-pandemic level of economic 
output
while other rich economies, like the euro area, have not. Even so, consumer prices in the euro area 
have risen by more than 4% over the past year, which is a lot, especially if youa€™re a German. Had 
there been less American stimulus, there would have been less inflation, but there would also have 
been less growth in output and employment. It is possible that less stimulus might have meant a lot 
less
inflation and only a little less of the other stuff. But on the other hand, unemployment is much 
costlier than inflation, so you really would need quite a lot less inflation for not much less 
employment growth to break even, so to speak, relative to the reality in which we find ourselvesa€!

LINK:

The Bellows
Inflation. ..

I dona€™ t want this newsletter to be an all-inflation-all-the-time thing, and I feel reasonably 
sure that you dona€™ t want this newsletter to be an all-inflation-all-the-time thing either, and 
so I will do my best not to write about inflation any more, for a while at least, unless something 
really extraordinary happens. My feeling is that inflation will rema€!

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- 1 comment A- Ryan Avent
Leave a comment

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

