
Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

LECTURE NOTES: DAY 1: Introduction: Five Questions Surrounding the Identification of 1870 as the 
Hinge of History
Let me talk for a while, and then leta€™ s see if we can have a successful discussion here 
afterwardsa€!

Read more

2 months ago A- 6 likes A- Brad DeLong


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

LECTURE NOTES: DAY 2: Numerical Guesses at AMe Quantitative Picture of Long-Run Economic Growth

Population: 70,000 years ago, back in the Early Paleolithic Age, there were perhaps 100,000 of 
usa€”100,000 East African plains apes who looked like us, moved like us, acted like us, talked like 
us, anda€!
Read more

2 months ago A- Brad DeLong



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

a€oeWesta€D, a€oeNorth Atlantica€D, or a€oeDover Circle-Plusa€D?, & BRIEFLY NOTED: For 2023-01-21 
Sa

FOCUS: a€ceWesta€D or a€oeDover Circle-Plusa€D? A student asked me why, in my lectures earlier this 
week, I kept on referring to the a€oeNorth Atlantica€D rather than the a€ceWesterna€D economies. 
Why did I use the firsta€
Read more

20 days ago A- 16 likes A- 3 comments A- Brad DeLong


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

DAY 3: LECTURE NOTES: The Logic of the Malthusian Economy

From 70,000 to 10,000 Years Ago 70,000 years ago, back in the Early Paleolithic Age, there were 
perhaps 100,000 of usa€’T00,000 East African plains apes who looked like us, moved like us, acted 
like usa€!
Read more

22 days ago A- 3 likes A- Brad DeLong



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

LECTURE NOTES: Lessons from Simulating a Malthusian Economy

Aha! SubStack now has a LATEX module! And this makes me think, once again, that I should worry the 
question of C.P. Snowa€™ s The Two Cultures in my economic history coursesa€! Basically, the 1/3 of 
studenta€!
Read more

24 days ago A- 26 likes A- 5 comments A- Brad DeLong


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

DAY 4: LECTURE NOTES: Efflorescences & Dark Ages in the Agrarian Age

The Theory of the Malthusian Economy: Efflorescences & Dark Ages If this were a different course, 
we would spend a week or more probably two building an economic model of how a society in 
Malthusian ea€!
Read more

22 days ago A- Brad DeLong



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

DAY 5: LECTURE NOTES: 2.3. Inequality & Domination Before Modern Economic Growth

Once people began to farm, especially farm grains, they become relatively stationary: 
Agriculturalists cannot carry their resources away with them. Their wealth is in their land and the 
crops they ara€!
Read more

15 days ago A- Brad DeLong


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

DAY 6: LECTURE NOTES: 2.4. Slow Pace of Innovation & Discovery Before Modern Economic Growth

2.4.1. In Everything Except Economic Growth, They Were Like Us It could have been different. The 
rate of growth of human technology could have been faster, back in the Agrarian Age. They were 
capable a€!
Read more

3 days ago A- Brad DeLong



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Readings for Econ 135 S 2023: History of Economic Growth

Required Books: Clark: AFarewell to Alms Allen: Global Economic History DeLong: Slouching Towards 
Utopia 1. Introduction Day 1: 2022-01-17 Tu: Introduction Required: Clark 1; Allen 1; DeLong Intro. 
Optionaa€!

Read more

a month ago A- Brad DeLong

