Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• LOL GOP: a€™ Trump ending up on the path that will kill the most people has always been 
inevitable. Ita€™ s why I dona€™ t buy the idea that he does terrible stuff because Putin owns him. 
He does terrible
stuff because thata€™ s want he wants to do & Putin sees the beneficial evil in encouraging thata€! 
<https://twitter.com/LOLGOP/status/1417118290254696451>

• Rangathetrainer: Create Your Own Lightboard Effect for Nothing! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pQkZkdFV_E8>

• Alan Pegoli: Laundry Lens'. a€~Laundry symbols readera€! 
<https://apps.apple.com/us/app/laundry-lens/idl513767864>

•  Kellen Browning: Tech Workers Who Swore Off the Bay Area Are Coming Back'. a€~Critics said the 
pandemic would make the industry flee San Francisco and its southern neighbor, Silicon Valley. But 
tech
cana€™t seem to quit its gravitational centera€! 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2021/07/15/technology/tech-workers-bay-area-back.html>

• Andrew Exum: a€™ I recommend two appsa€”AllTrails and onXa€”for those hitting the trail this 
summera€! <https://twitter.com/ExumAM/status/1417096661654978561>


stun because thatafe1™ s want he wants to do & rutin sees the benehcial evil in encouraging 
thatafe. <https://twitter.com/LOLGOP/status/141 /11 829025409645 1>

• Rangathetrainer: Create Your Own Lightboard Effect for Nothing! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pQkZkdFV E8>

• Alan Pegoli: Laundry Lens'. a€~Laundry symbols readera€! 
<https://apps.apple.com/us/app/laundry-lens/id1513767864>

•  Kellen Browning: Tech Workers Who Swore Off the Bay Area Are Coming Back'. a€~Critics said the 
pandemic would make the industry flee San Francisco and its southern neighbor, Silicon Valley. But 
tech
cana€™t seem to quit its gravitational centera€! 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2021/07/15/technology/tech-workers-bay-area-back.html>

• Andrew Exum: a€™ I recommend two appsa€”AllTrails and onXa€”for those hitting the trail this 
summera€! <https://twitter.com/ExumAM/status/1417096661654978561>

Paragraphs:

I have been flying. Chances are A%t if AMere is somebody here with a breakthrough delta case who is 
(somewhat) infectious & doesna€™ t know it, ita€™ s me. Also, it might make old people I come near 
somewhat less
anxious cost, some potential benefit. Only a moral midget would not:

Bryan Caplan: Why Do so Many Vaccinated People Keep Wearing Masks?'. a€~High risk 7%. High anxiety 
31.1%. Low discomfort 24.1%. Virtue signaling 37.8%. 1,755 votesa€!
LINK: <https://twitter .com/delong/status/1412072412586274818>

The right solution, in my opinion, is to make a Supreme Court appointment a twenty-year one-shot 
job, and appoint a new Supreme Court justice every year:

Ben Wittes: Prepared Statement'. a€~I do not doubt that Republican conduct over the past half 
decade has set a new milestone of aggressiveness, and I am not trying to draw any sort of 
equivalence
between Republican behavior during the Trump administration and prior outrages against the norms of 
the confirmation process. They are not equivalent. That is the nature of an escalatory cycle; each
escalation takes the combatants to a new place. My point, rather, is that the behavior was 
altogether predictable given the cycles of retribution that had taken place over the previous three 
decades. I
believe  that court-packing, enlargement, or some other manipulative scheme will likely serve as 
the next phase of this ongoing escalation^’’unless, that is, as I describe below, our political 
actors take
it  as an opportunity for deescalation. The essential reason for the long-term escalatory cycle is 
that both sides perceive themselves as playing defense against a high-stakes attack on their 
fundamental
values. Both sides perceive the judicial nominations of the other side as deeply threatening and as 
part of a long-term attempt by the opposing party to exercise political control through unelected
means. Moreover, both sides believe, with some justice, that the other side plays dirty and will 
manipulate the rules to its own advantage. Hence, each side has a significant incentive to violate 
the
current norms when it has the chance and the powera€’’believing, probably rightly, that the other 
side would do the same as soon as it had the chance. Ita€™ s a classic prisonera€™ s dilemma, and it
operates according to its own logic. The perception on the part of each party that it is acting 
defensively blinds both sides to their own contributions to the decay of the governing normsa€!

LINK: <https ://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/Witte s-Testimony.pdf>

It is much less clear to me than it is to Paul that the a€cemediana€D core measures are to be 
preferreda€”it depends on how rising used-car and hotel prices feed into expectations. What is 
clear to me is that I DO NOT
CARE. We are burning rubber as we rejoin the highway at speed. Some inflation now is necessary, and 
a sign that we are doing desirable things:

Paul Krugman: Strengthening Your Core: a€™ The theory of core inflation has been a huge success 
story: people who understood it avoided the inflation panics of 2008 and early 2011 (remember
Paul Ryan accusing Bernanke of a€oedebasing the dollara€D?). Which measure of core inflation should 
you use? It didna€™ t really matter: they all told the same storya€”until now. But in the post­
pandemic, conventional core is running very hot, while other measures, especially median inflation, 
not. It seems clear to me that the less-used measures are telling a more accurate story: used car
prices  and hotel rates dona€™ t belong in core inflation. Markets seem to get that; economic 
reporting less soa€!

LINK: <https://twitter.eom/paulkrugman/status/1416786559752409093>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

