Subscribe now

Give a gift subscription

First:

Finding excuses for aCcewhat we have, we hold!a€D

I have two standard reference points for the persistent structure of anti-liberal thought. The 
first is Albert Hirshmana€™ s 1991 book The Rhetoric of Reaction: Perversity, Futility, Jeopardy 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press) <https ://archive 
.org/details/rhetoricofreactiOOOOhirs/mode/1 up>. The second is Stephen Holmesa€™ s 1993 book The 
Anatomy of Anti-Liberalism

<https://www.google.com/books/edition/The Anatomy _of_Antiliberalism/wSqLS_iJDLQC>.

It is with those in my mind that I ran across this earlier this week: here John Holbo is surprised 
that George Fitzhugh (1857): Cannibals All! or; Slaves without Masters (Richmond: A. Morris) 
<https://archive.org/details/cannibalsallorsl35481gut> is not at all representative of proslavery 
thought before the United States Civil War. Let me give him the mic:


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Picture:

Wunderkind Cathy Wooda€™ s Ark Innovation ATF:

A DIZ InnAwitlzxn ETC /ADIZIZ\


.                                    ☆  Add to watchlist ) Visitors trend 2W 1 10W T 9M f

NYSEArca - Nasdaq Real Time Price. Currency in USD x          /

98.37 +3.64 (+3.84%) 98.20 -0.17 (-0.17%)

At close: 04:00PM EST                    After hours: 07:30PM EST

Summary Chart Conversations Historical Data Profile Options Holdings Performance Risk

Quote Lookup

Full

© Indicators © Comparison S Date Range ID 5D IM 3M 6M YTD 1Y 2Y 5Y Max 0 1W * v                     
                                    <S> LLI

I ARKK 98.370

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Sneha Mordani: Why HCQ & Ivermectin Were Removed from Indiaa€™ s Covidd€“19 Treatment Protocol'. 
a€~Little to no effect on Covid-related mortality or clinical recovery of the patienta€! 
<https://www.indiatodav.in/coronavirus-outbreak/storv/whv-hcq-ivermectin-dropped-india-covid-treatme
nt-protocol-1857306-2021-09-26>

• Axel Gustafsson Oxenstierna af SAJdermAJre: a€™An nescis, mifili, quantilla prudentia mundus 
regatur?a€! <https://www.latin-is-simple.com/en/vocabulary/phrase/134/>

• Scott Lemieux: More Evidence that Omicron Produces Milder Infections than Previous Strains 
<https://www.lawversgunsmonevblog.com/2021/12/more-evidence-that-omicron-produces-milder-infections-
than-previous-strains>

•  Abigail Smith Adams: To John Adams, 31 March 1776'. a€™ Your Brothera€™ s youngest child lies 
bad with convulsion fitts. Adieu. I need not say how much I am Your ever faithfull Frienda€! 
<https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Adams/04-01 -02-0241>

•  Matthew Yglesias: $1.75 trillion Is Plenty of Money to Write a Good Build Back Better Bill: Here 
are some solid optionsa€! <


Slow Boring

$1.75 trillion is plenty of money to write a good Build Back Better bill

I dona€™ t have a lot to say about the latest blowup between Joe Manchin and Democratic Party 
leaders over Build Back Better except to say that I think the whole notion of a€celeveragea€D in 
this situation is a farce. Joe Biden carried 25 states in 2020, and those states send 47 Democratic 
Party Senators to Washington. It is very lucky for progressives that Jon Tester and Sherrod Brown
choose not to espouse significant deviations from the Biden agenda (though Democrats may come to 
regret that if those seats flip GOP in 2024), and they are also lucky that Joe Manchin is much more 
progressive than the median voter in West Virginiaa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 112 likes A- 158 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

•  Paul Krugman: a€™ Is it just me, or has there been very little reporting on the bond marketa€™ s 
apparent decision that the big inflation scare was mostly a false alarm? Of course the market could 
be wrong, but still interesting <https:ZZt.co/6s Y 6E8 VAwf>a€!


Paul Krugman @paulkrugman

Is it just me, or has there been very little reporting on the bond market's apparent decision that 
the big inflation scare was mostly a false alarm? Of course the market could be wrong, but still 
interesting

FRED — 5-Year Breakeven Inflation Rate
3.2

f J

1.8

2021*01     2021*03        2021-05        2021*07        2021*09        2021-11

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis           fred.stlouisfed.org

4:12 PM r™ Dec 21,2021

1,615Likes330Retweets

Paragraphs:

Ian Beer & Samuel GroAY: a€~My other compression format is Turing-Complete !d€\ The sequence of 
steps which implement JBIG2 refinement are very flexible. Refinement steps can reference both the 
output bitmap and any previously created segments, as well as render output to either the current 
page or a segment. By carefully crafting the context-dependent part of the refinement
decompression, ita€™ s possible to craft sequences of segments where only the refinement 
combination operators have any effect. In practice this means it is possible to apply the AND, OR, 
XOR and XNOR logical operators between memory regions at arbitrary offsets from the current pagea€™ 
s JBIG2Bitmap backing buffer. And since that has been unboundeda€! ita€™ s possible to perform
those  logical operations on memory at arbitrary out-of-bounds offsetsa€!. The bootstrapping 
operations for the sandbox escape exploit are written to run on this logic circuit and the whole 
thing runs in this weird, emulated environment created out of a single decompression pass through a 
JBIG2 stream. Ita€™ s pretty incredible, and at the same time, pretty terrifying. In a future post 
(currently
being finished), wea€™ 11 take a look at exactly how they escape the IMTranscoderAgent sandboxa€!

LINK: <https://googleproiectzero.blogspot.com/2021/12/a-deep-dive-into-nso-zero-click.html>

David Dayen: Now Can We Try the Day One Agenda?'. a€~The waste of a yeara€™ s worth of the time of 
members of Congress, their staffs, reporters, think tanks, political operatives, advocacy groups, 
media planners, political advertising producers, and really the majority of the U.S. public 
culminated on the December 19 edition of Fox News Sunday, with Joe Manchina€™ s tortured
announcement that he simply could not move forward on the Build Back Better Act. a€oela€™ ve tried 
everything humanly possible. I cana€™ t get there,a€D a saddened Manchin intoned. I suppose he 
could have tried actually wanting to get therea€!. The July 28 document, signed by Manchin and 
Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, cementing the terms for a reconciliation bill. Just
about  everything in it has been incorporated into Build Back Better, and Manchina€™ s still 
opposeda€!. He even wanted an end to Federal Reserve quantitative easing, and while Congress 
couldna€™t possibly guarantee that, the Fed did it anyway, on his schedulea€!. Manchina€™ s 
response would be that he wanted to remove gimmicks that serve to a€oecamouflage the real cost,a€D 
by
creating temporary programs that would later be made permanent. I have agreed that doing fewer 
programs on a permanent basis would be better policy; the leadership promised the moon in a tight 
legislative environment and then hobbled everything when spending was capped instead of eliminating 
programs, making an unpalatable soup of the agenda. ManchinaC™ s private offer included
universal pre-K (so obviously means testing wasna€™t a no-go on everything), expanding Obamacare 
subsidies, and $500 billion to fight climate change. There would be plenty of headroom to include 
other pieces in such a package, but youa€™ d have to believe that Manchin would actually be willing 
to get to yes to start pursuing that option. I can structure a lot of frameworks based on things
Manchin has historically supported or endorsed days or weeks ago, but I cana€™ t see any cause for 
optimism that Manchin, from his current crouch, will jump at thema€!

LINK: <https://prospect.org/dav-one-agenda/now-can-we-trv-the-day-one-agenda/>

Uri: On The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Messaging Apps In Getting Me To Do Things'. a€~One of my 
recent discoveries is that messaging apps can help me work better on various tasks that have 
nothing innately to do with messaging. For example, Ia€™ ve started using Whatsapp as my to-do 
lista€!. Ia€™m happy to insult your patience by speculating that the reason this messaging
technique works is by somehow hacking your a€oesocial braina€Da€l. Various kinds of decision-making 
and information-retention seem to work better when Ia€™m communicating with another human rather 
than just putting words on a digital pagea€!. I recently signed up for the amusingly titled 
<http://bossasaservice.life/>a€!

LINK: <https://www.atvbt.com/messaging-apps-for-everything/>

Aaron Rupar: GOP Governorsa€™ Covid Messaging Is a Mess. Even Trump Seems Like a Leader by 
Comparison.: a€~Ita€™ s been a bit jarring to turn on TV news in recent days and see Republican 
governors demonstrate that theya€™ ve seemingly learn[ed] nothinga€!. Kristi Noema€! earlier this 
year tried to take a victory lap for her laissez faire responsea€! went on Fox & Friends last
Fridaya€! was askeda€! what a€oecommon sensea€D steps shea€™ s takinga€!. Noem said shea€™ s 
advising people to wash their hands and take their vitaminsa€!. DeSantisa€! reacted as though Maria 
Bartiromo asked him to recite his bank account and Social Security numbers when she inquired about 
whether he had been boosteda€!

LINK:



Public Notice

GOP governors' covid messaging is a mess. Even Trump seems like a leader by comparison.

Longtime readers are probably aware that Ia€™ m not a big fan of former President Donald Trump. But 
I also try to give credit where it is due. And this week, Trump has emerged as an unlikely voice of 
Republican sanity, such as it is, when it comes to Covid vaccinesa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 7 likes A- 1 comment A- Aaron Rupar

David French: A Powerful, Implied Indictment in the New York Times'. a€~I read a remarkable, 
comprehensive report in the New York Times that attempts to detail the true civilian toll of 
Americaa€™ s air wars in Iraq and Syria. I urge you to read the entire thing, but let me summarize: 
The basic premise is simple to state but remarkably difficult to documenta€’’American estimates of 
civilian
casualties in its fight against ISIS are wrong, very wrong. We killed far more civilians than we 
claim. Lead reporter Azmat Khan and her team made their case through months of meticulous research. 
They pored over government documents. They visited the sites of strikes. They interviewed victims. 
And even if you account for a degree of deception and spin, the conclusions seem inescapable.
Our aerial attacks may be precisea€”the weapons almost always go exactly where they are aimeda€”but 
the targeting wasna€™t always accurate. In other words, we precisely hit the wrong targeta€!

LINK:


David French: A Powerful, Implied Indictment in the New York Times'. a€~I read a remarkable, 
comprehensive report in the New York Times that attempts to detail the true civilian toll of 
AmericaaC™ s air wars in Iraq and Syria. I urge you to read the entire thing, but let me summarize: 
The basic premise is simple to state but remarkably difficult to documenta€’’American estimates of 
civilian
casualties in its fight against ISIS are wrong, very wrong. We killed far more civilians than we 
claim. Lead reporter Azmat Khan and her team made their case through months of meticulous research. 
They pored over government documents. They visited the sites of strikes. They interviewed victims. 
And even if you account for a degree of deception and spin, the conclusions seem inescapable.
Our aerial attacks may be precisea€”the weapons almost always go exactly where they are aimeda€”but 
the targeting wasna€™t always accurate. In other words, we precisely hit the wrong targetaC!

LINK:

A Powerful, Implied Indictment in the New York Times

This newsletter is going to be just a bit different, especially for a piece so close to Christmas. 
But ita€™ s about a topic of particular concern, and one that deserves more attention. Ita€™ s 
about our war on terror, how we fought, and whya€”despite all of our mistakesa€”our enemies bear 
the moral responsiba€!

Read more

a year ago A- 352 likes A- 128 comments A- David French
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

PAID SUBSCRIBERS ONLY Content Below:

Coffee yesterday morning in the outdoor Berkeley drizzle (although under an awning) with Patrick 
Iber of U. Wisconsin-Madison <https://patrickiber.org>, author of Patrick Iber (2015): Neither 
Peace Nor Freedom: The Cultural Cold War in Latin America (Cambridge: Harvard University Press) 
<https://www.google.com/books/edition/Neither Peace nor_Freedom/ZymoCgAAQBAJ>. We
talked, as one does, of LA©on Blum, Jacobo Arbenz, Muhammed Mosaddegh, Salvador Allende, Ludwig von 
Mises, Augusto Pinochet, Friedrich von Hayek, Milton Friedman, T.W. Shultz, Arnold Harberger, 
Ricardo Lagos, Gabriel Boric, and company.

I have talked about Weimar Russia, Wilhelmine China, National Hinduist India. Perhaps I should talk 
about history rhyming with interwar France as well? Late-Third Republic America. But, again, it is 
only history rhyming: their Fox Newsa€™ s were multiple, and were made up of real pro-Nazis!


Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

PAID SUBSCRIBERS ONLY Content Below:

Coffee yesterday morning in the outdoor Berkeley drizzle (although under an awning) with Patrick 
Iber of U. Wisconsin-Madison <https://patrickiber.org>, author of Patrick Iber (2015): Neither 
Peace Nor Freedom: The Cultural Cold War in Latin America (Cambridge: Harvard University Press) 
<https://www.google.com/books/edition/Neither Peace nor_Freedom/ZymoCgAAQBAJ>. We
talked, as one does, of LA©on Blum, Jacobo Arbenz, Muhammed Mosaddegh, Salvador Allende, Ludwig von 
Mises, Augusto Pinochet, Friedrich von Hayek, Milton Friedman, T.W. Shultz, Arnold Harberger, 
Ricardo Lagos, Gabriel Boric, and company.

I have talked about Weimar Russia, Wilhelmine China, National Hinduist India. Perhaps I should talk 
about history rhyming with interwar France as well? Late-Third Republic America. But, again, it is 
only history rhyming: their Fox Newsa€™ s were multiple, and were made up of real pro-Nazis!

