Subscribe now

1) John Fernald, a€oeProductivity and Potential Output Before, During, and After the Great 
Recessiona€D, 2014 <https://www.nber.org/papers/w20248>

2) James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson, a€oeHas the Business Cycle Changed, and Why?a€D, NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual, 2002, pp. 159-230 <https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/stock/files/ has 
the_business cycle_changed and why.pdf>

AJ3: Stepping back, let me again underline the extraordinary persistence of the neoliberal order. 
In the Dover-Circle-Plus economies, at least, it did not:

• restore productivity growth to its pre-1975 pace,

• rework the system of economic distribution so that government programs provided more support to 
the unlucky who had strong claims on public assistance,

• rework the system of economic distribution so that government programs provided less support to 
those who were politically powerful and well-connected,

• reunify the western alliance behind the civilizational project of liberty and democracy, or

• restore moral order and discipline to rich, post-industrial societies.

All it did, as I have said, was to widen the inequalities in the distribution of income and wealth. 
And yet it persisted, and was even triumphant as late as 2004, or perhaps even later.

Yingyi Qian points out that my failure to understand the attraction and the persistence of the 
neoliberal project substantially flaws the later chapters of my book. I take the classic exposition 
of the neoliberal impulse to be Martin Feldsteina€™ s introduction to The American Economy in 
Transition'.


rad DeLong's Grasping Reality

READING: Aze Ur-Text of AMe Neoliberal Turn: My Teacher Marty Feldstein (1980)

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
tha€!
Read more

6 months ago A- 8 likes A- 5 comments A- Brad DeLong

If you reread it today it seems almost unhingea€’’largely wrong in its critique of social 
democracy, and unhinged in its vision of the Bright Neoliberal Future that the shift to 
Reagan-Thatcher was going to bring.

Yes, market means are frequently (usually?) more effective at accomplishing social-democratic ends 
than are command-and-control means. For reasons ably set out by Martin Weitzman, 
command-and-control does best in a tightly-coupled production process, as within a firm or a value 
chain:

Weitzman P & Q 1974
889KB a'™ PDF File
Download

Download

Yes, rent-seeking is an important failure mode of big (and small!) government. But how it was that 
the social-democratic political-economic mode of... distribution? allocation?... could not be 
sustained for more than three decades in the North Atlantic while the neoliberal mode hangs 
ona€”that still surprises me.

And you can concede some valid elements of a neoliberal critique of social democracy without 
winding up at the right-neoliberal position of Reagan and Thatcher that the relative poverty of the 
poor is a feature of modern society rather than a bug. In my younger days I was a card-carrying 
a€celeft-neoliberala€D, after all. I believed in:

• a focus on generating a stable price-level, high-investment, high productivity-growth economy,

• market means to social-democratic ends where appropriate,

• an attack on rent-seeking of all kinds, and

• a reliance on means-tested benefits to diminish the effect of wealth inequalities

That seemed the obviously-right thing to do in the late 1980s and 1990s to return us to the days of 
the trentes glorieuses, and to assemble a durable political coalition to deal with the fact that an 
awful lot of people welcomed Thatcher and Reagan. It was a world in which a life-long Lenin 
apologist like Eric Hobsbawm could also write in his Age of Extremes that:

There was considerable scope for applying the neo-liberal cleansing-agent to the encrusted hull of 
many a good ship 'Mixed Economy' with beneficial results. Even the British Left was eventually to 
admit that some of the ruthless shocks imposed on the British economy by Mrs Thatcher had probably 
been necessary. There were good grounds for some of the disillusion with state­
managed industries and public administration that became so common in the 1980sa€!


Now Ed Balls and I can whimper that the left-neoliberal correction to social democracy was within 
our grasped, and was in fact almost graspeda€”that what Gary Gerstle calls the New Deal Order and I 
call social democracy could have been stabilized via a left-neoliberal correction, rather than 
being followed, as it was, by a near-hegemonic Right-Neoliberal Order. We can whimper that only the 
fact that
five Supreme Court justices were partisan Republicans in the U.S. in 2000 and that Nick Clegg was 
Nick Clegg kept us from advancing into the Broad Sunlit Uplands in the US and UK.

But that is not very convincing, is it? Especially since the stubborn persistence of 
right-neoliberalism now shading into ethno-fascism is present in nearly the entire OECD.

My view is that social democracy ought to work. Buta€”even when in the left-neoliberal sheep's 
clothing that Clinton and Blair donneda€”it does not. It is not politically sustainable. And, 
indeed, it was not sustained.
The fact that I have a hard time believing it is not sustainable and understanding why it was not 
sustained points to a big gap in my understanding. Yingyi Qian is right in pinpointing this as a 
flaw in the book.

3) Amanda Robb, a€ce Anatomy of a Fake News Scandala€d, Rolling Stone November 16,2017 <https:// 
www.rollingstone.com/feature/anatomy-of-a-fake-news-scandal-125877/>.

4) Barack Obama, a€ce2004 Democratic National Convention SpeechaCD, PBS Newshour July 27,2004 
<https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/barack-obamas-keynote-address-at-the-2004-democraticnational-conv
ention>.

5) J. Bradford DeLong, a€oeThis Time, It Is Not Different: The Persistent Concerns of Financial 
Macroeconomicsa€D, in Alan Blinder, Andrew Lo, and Robert Solow, eds., i, New York: Russell Sage 
Foundation, 2012 <https://books.google.com/books?id=jDLAgAAQBAJ> 
<https://delong.typepad.com/20120411-russell-sage-delong-paper.pdf>

6) Warren Buffett, Berkshire-Hathaway Chairmana€™s Letter 2002, February 28,2002 <https:// 
www.berkshirehathaway.com/2001ar/20011etter.html>.

7) Olivier Blanchard and Lawrence Summers, a€oeHysteresis and the European Unemployment Problema€D, 
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1986, pp. 15-78 <https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/ 3585159.pdf>

8) The rough consensus is represented by: Ben Bernanke, a€oeJapanese Monetary Policy: A Case of 
Self-Induced Paralysis?a€D, Princeton, December 1999 <https://www.princeton.edu/~pkrugman/ 
bernanke_paralysis.pdf>; Kenneth Rogoff, aCceComment on Krugmana€D, Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity 1998:2 pp.194-9 <https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/
1998/06/1998b_bpea_krugman_dominquez_rogoff.pdf>. Some of the few on the other side were Paul 
Krugman, a€oelt's Baaack: Japan's Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trapa€D, Brookings Papers 
on Economic Activity, 1998:2 pp. 137-205 
<https://www.brookings.edu/wpcontent/uploads/1998/06/1998b_bpea_krugman_dominquez_rogoff.pdf>; 
Lawrence Summers,"How Should Long-Term
Monetary                 Policy Be Determined?a€D, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 23 3, pt. 
2 (1991), 625-31; and again Paul Krugman, The Return of Depression Economics, New York: W.W. 
Norton, 1999 <https://books .google .com/books?id=PBHeBndqcZsC>.

9) Raghuram Rajan, a€oeHas Financial Development Made the World Riskier?a€D, The Greenspan Era: 
Lesson for the Future, Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2005, pp. 313-369 
<https://www.kansascityfed.org/documents/3326/PDF-Rajan2005.pdf>.

10) London School of Economics, What Should Economists and Policymakers Learn from the Financial 
Crisis? March 25,2013 <https://www.lse.ac.uk/lse-player?id=1856>.

11) Carol Loomis, a€oeRobert Rubin on the Job He Never Wanteda€D, Fortune November 26,2007 
<http://www.bu.edu/econ/files/2011/01/Loomis.pdf>.

12)For example: Chris Giles, a€ceHarvard President Warns on Global Imbalancesa€n, Financial Times 
January 28,2006 <https://www.ft.com/content/f925a9e0-9035-llda-9e7e-0000779e2340>; Maurice Obstfeld 
and Kenneth Rogoff , aCceThe Unsustainable U.S. Current Account Position RevisitedaCD, in Richard 
Clarida, ed., G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2007, pp. 339-375 <https://www.nber.org/system/files/ 
chapters/c0127/c0127.pdf>

13) John Lippert, aCceFriedman Would Be Roiled as Chicago Disciples Rue Repudiationa€D, Bloomberg, 
December 23,2008 <https://delong.tvpepad.com/egregious moderation/2008/12/ 
john-lippert-on-the-chicago-school.html>. There is more context:


DeLong's Grasping Reality

A Non-Socratic Dialogue on AMe Decline of Milton Friedman's Influence; & BRIEFLY NOTED: For 
2021-05-22 Sa

First: A Non-Socratic Dialogue: Milton Friedmana€™ s Influence Kept Right-Wing Economists from 
Reverting to Full Crazed Liquidationist Nutjobs for 60 Years. But Why Did It Then Decline So Fast 
in the Deca€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 1 like A- Brad DeLong

Claudia Sahm: "We should have a recession,a€U John H. Cochrane said in November [2008], speaking to 
students and investors. a€oePeople who spend their lives pounding nails in Nevada need something 
else to do.a€D #yikes <https://t.co/vbSKhIRMtR>:



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

READING: John Lippert on AMe Idiocy of AMe Chicago School in Late 2008

a€!Cochranea€™ s declarationa€”made at a time when the share of the U.S, labor force in 
construction was below its long-run average and had been below its long-run average for fifteen 
monthsa€”that: a€oewe should!
Read more

2 years ago A- 2 likes A- 2 comments A- Brad DeLong

Scott Gosnell: I was there. I may even have a recording down in the archives and may have sprained 
my eyes I rolled them so hard.

Brad DeLong: What! Really? Tell me mored!

I mean, private housing construction as a share of GDP had crashed from its peak of 5.0% of GDP in 
2005Q4 through its historical average of 3.4% in 2007Q2, and had bottomed all the way down to 2.1% 
by 2008Q4, when Cochrane was opining about too many people pounding nails in Nevada. How was it 
possible to say such a thing? How could he avoid looking at graphs like this
one, and noticing that residential construction employment had already fallen from 150% to 60% of 
its normal share even as he spoke?

And how did the audience react?

Joe Marshall: Holy hell. What the fd”- was wrong with these people?

Scott Gosnell: I went to all of those econ talks at Gleacher while I lived in Chicago. The 
noticeable thing about Cochrane was that he was very good at financial economics, but fell apart 
when he tried to jump to macro. But of course faculty could say all kinds of things without getting 
much skepticism. Being a Mellon-style liquidationist was sort of edgy and cool among the
Republican-leaning economists at the time.

Brad DeLong: TouchA©... One question I always ask Paul Krugman and company is: what happened to the 
influence of Milton Friedman? No one was a stronger anti-liquidationist than Milton Friedman.d! The 
shift to "liquidationism" as the default policy view of a Republican economist (when Republicans 
were out of power, at least), seems to have happened remarkably quickly
in one decade, the 2000s, and without analysis and without argument. How and why did this happen, 
that being a full-fledged Mellonian became "edgy" and "cool"?

Scott Gosnell: I think it came swift on the heels of a Randian political moment. Where before, 
Austrian economics would get you a glance askance, in 2008, it would get you a $300+ bottle of wine 
at dinner with Paul Ryan.

Brad DeLong: TouchA©... The Hayek-Hoover-Mellon-Marx axis was a remarkable thing among Republican 
economists... especially since nobody has ever been able to write down a coherent overinvestment 
business-cycle model...

Paul Krugman: Hey, I answered that question at length some years backstops'.!It.co/MCuyiMwXCg>: 
Friedman tried to save free-market economics from itself, admitting that the economy wasnd™ t 
self-correcting but arguing that a rule that didnd™ t sound Keynesian would let conservative avoid 
thinking about thatd!. But ultimately free-market Keynesian, even disguised
with a monetarist mask, wasnd™ t sustainable.

Jim Beller: Having his disciples throwing people out of airplanes was a bad look.

Brad DeLong: But, Paul, as you note, Bernanke in 2002 and Mankiw in 2006 still saw Friedman as 
doethe economist of the centurydD chttps://gregmankiw.blogspot.com/2006/11/milton-friedman,html> 
<https://federalreserve.gOv/BOARDDOCS/SPEECHES/2002/20021108/>. They were fine with the 
doegovernment should not interfere with the economydD and
doewhatever is the monetary policy that happens to stabilize aggregate demand is the true 
non-interfering d~neutrald™ monetary policydD. It was a con, yes, but it was a successful con. And 
it is not clear that it was wrong as a practical policy positiond!. JM Keynes (macro)-Henry Simons 
(antitrust)-AC Pigou (externalities) is not that far from what you or I believe, or what
Milton Friedman believedd”or, at least, would graciously concede in his old age in outdoor lunch in 
North Beach if I could get him off of his hobbyhorses of d~k% ruled™ & d~government failure is 
almost always certain to be worse than market failure .d™

The way you put it in your 2013 piece is like this:

If markets can go so wrong that they cause Great Depressions, how can you be a free-market true 
believer on everything except macro? And as American conservatism moved ever further right, it had 
no room for any kind of interventionism, not even the sterilized, clean-room interventionism of 
Friedmand™ s monetarisma€D.
I think that is (a) right, (b) much too compressed, but (c) ignores the problem of doe where do you 
stop?dD

Having the government establish & maintain a property-rights order & enforce contracts is, after 
all, a form of d ce interference a€D to the anarcho-capitalists. And while there are some ACs who 
want a contract dispute between you and me resolved by me dcehiringdD my police force and you 
dcehiringa€D ours and the two settling the dispute by the Final Argument of
Kingsd”thus going all the way back to full feudalism as societyd™ s organizing principled’’most do 
not. Most stop being happy with police & courts.

So why is police & courts acceptable, while police & courts & demand management is not?

I think it has something to do with Schumpeter, von Hayek, and von Mises; the context of 
earlyd“20th center Vienna; the idea that humans are individuals for whom private property and 
one-shot exchange are dcenaturala€D (as opposed to creatures that establish and cement societal 
bonds via ongoing reciprocal gift-exchange relationships); the philosophical position that all is 
for
the best in this the best of all oossible worlds: and the resultins theological belief that:


25) Lawrence Summers, a€oeThe Age of Secular Stagnationa€D, Foreign Affairs 
<http://larrysummers.com/2016/02/17/the-age-of-secular-stagnation/>.

26) See Olivier J. Blanchard, a€oePublic Debt and Low Interest Ratesa€d, January 4,2019 
<https://www.aeaweb.org/webcasts/2019/aea-presidential-address-public-debt-and-low-interest-rates>

27) Barack Obama, Remarks by the President in State of the Union Address, January 27,2010 
<https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/remarks-president-state-union-address>

28) John Maynard Keynes, a€oeHow to Avoid a Slumpa€D, The Times, January 12-14,1937. Reprinted in 
John Maynard Keynes, Collected Writings XXI: Activities 1931-1939: World Crises and Policies in 
Britain and America, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982, p. 390.

29) Ben Bernanke, a€oeThe Near- and Longer-Term Prospects for the U.S. EconomyaCO August 26,2011 
<https://fraser.stlouisfed.org/title/statements-speeches-ben-s-bernanke-453/near-longerterm-prospect
s-us-economy-9116>; cf. J. Bradford DeLong, a€oeBen Bernankea€™ s Dream Worlda€D, Project 
Syndicate, August 30,2011: a€oeBen Bernanke's recent claima€! is simply not credible. Worse
still, it sanctions a hands-off approach to economic depression that threatens to undermine US and 
global growth for years to comea€!a€D <https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/ 
ben-bernanke-s-dream-world>.

30) Josh Bivens, a€oeThe Reinhart and Rogoff Magical 90 Percent Threshold Loses Its Magic ?a€D, 
Working Economics April 16,2013 
<https://www.epi.org/blog/reinhart-rogoff-magical-90-percent-threshold/>.


31)

n n     1— sz? T------------------------------ M    * \ c*               in i— ■       n‘ TA        
  i innn.

    :                      : 1_—1            : 1 ■

         1    I„J „ TL: ■„ —             *        *     ------ --- ’ll              : •             
:      *          1c ,1... //            ~ —1             /


25) Lawrence Summers, a€oeThe Age of Secular Stagnationa€D, Foreign Affairs 
<http://larrysummers.com/2016/02/17/the-age-of-secular-stagnation/>.

26) See Olivier J. Blanchard, a€oePublic Debt and Low Interest Ratesa€d, January 4,2019 
<https://www.aeaweb.org/webcasts/2019/aea-presidential-address-public-debt-and-low-interest-rates>

27) Barack Obama, Remarks by the President in State of the Union Address, January 27,2010 
<https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/remarks-president-state-union-address>

28) John Maynard Keynes, a€oeHow to Avoid a Slumpa€D, The Times, January 12-14,1937. Reprinted in 
John Maynard Keynes, Collected Writings XXI: Activities 1931-1939: World Crises and Policies in 
Britain and America, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982, p. 390.

29) Ben Bernanke, a€oeThe Near- and Longer-Term Prospects for the U.S. Economya€D August 26,2011 
<https://fraser.stlouisfed.org/title/statements-speeches-ben-s-bernanke-453/near—longerterm-prospect
s-us-economy-9116>; cf. J. Bradford DeLong, a€oeBen Bernankea€™ s Dream WorldaCd, Project 
Syndicate, August 30,2011: a€oeBen Bernanke's recent claima€! is simply not credible. Worse
still, it sanctions a hands-off approach to economic depression that threatens to undermine US and 
global growth for years to comea€!a€D <https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/ 
ben-bernanke-s-dream-world>.

30) Josh Bivens, a€oeThe Reinhart and Rogoff Magical 90 Percent Threshold Loses Its Magic ?a€D, 
Working Economics April 16,2013 
<https://www.epi.org/blog/reinhart-rogoff-magical-90-percent-threshold/>.

31)

Ben Bernanke, a€oeJapanese Monetary Policy: A Case of Self-Induced Paralysis ?a€D, Princeton 
December 1999: a€oeMoney issuance must ultimately raise the price level, even if nominal interest 
rates are bounded at zero. This is an elementary argument, but, as we will see, it is quite 
corrosive of claims of monetary impotencea€!a€D pp. 14-15 <https://www.princeton.edu/~pkrugman/
bernanke_paraly sis .pdf>

32) J. Bradford DeLong, a€oeUnderstanding the Lesser Depression: INCOMPLETE DRAFTa€U, Grasping 
Reality August 2011 
<https://delong.typepad.com/delong_long_form/2011/09/understanding-the-lesser-depression-incomplete-
draft.html>.

33) Adam Tooze, Crashed: How a Decade of Financial Crises Changed the World, New York: Penguin 
Books, 2018 <https://books.google .com/books?id=om2mDwAAQB A J>

34) Franklin Delano Roosevelt, a€oeThe New Deala€d, May 22,1932 
<https://publicpolicy.pepperdine.edu/academics/research/faculty-research/new-deal/roosevelt-speeches
/fr052232.htm>.

35) a€oea€!but a first-class temperamenta€D is the rest of the quote from Oliver Wendell Holmes, 
See Geoffrey Ward, A First-Class Temperament: The Emergence of Franklin Roosevelt, 1905-1928, New 
York: Vintage, 2014, p, xv <https://books.google.com/books?id=L_9vDwAAQBAJ>, drawing on reports by 
Donald Hiss, James Roosevelt, and Felix Frankfurter. Historian Randy Roberts summarizes the
pre-1928 assessment of FDR as a€oea "nice" but shallow chap-a bright, friendly, boon drinking 
companion at the Harvard Club, but wholly lacking in substance.a€D Randy Roberts, a€oeFDR in the 
House of Mirrorsa€D, Reviews in American History Vol. 18, No. 1 (March 1990), pp. 82-88 
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/2702731 .pdf>.

36) Barack Obama, 2010 State of the Union Address 
<https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/thepress-office/remarks-president-state-union-address>.

37) Cliff Asness et al., a€oeOpen Letter to Ben Bernankea€D, Wall Street Journal November 15,2010 
<https://www.wsj.com/articles/BL-REB-12460>.

38) Leopold von Ranke, Preface: Histories of the Latin and Germanic Nations from 1494-1514, 
excerpted in Fritz Stern, The Varieties of History, Cleveland: Meridian Books, 1956 
<https://books.google .com/?id=ubAWzgEACAAJ>, p. 57.
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

