Subscribe now

First:

IN JANUARY I am, once again, appropriating the intellectual property of the brilliant Melissa Dell 
chttps://dell-research-harvard.github.io>, and trying to teach my own version of her course 
Economics 1342: The History of Economic Growth 
<https://dell-research-harvard.github.io/teaching/econ1342>.

Economics 1342: The History of Economic Growth

Offered Fall 2019

This course examines the history of economic growth, beginning with the divergence between human
ancestors and other primates and continuing through the end of the 20th century. Topics covered
include  the  Neolithic  Revolution;  economic  growth  in  ancient  societies;  the  origins  of  
modern
economic  growth;  theories  and  evidence  about  the  institutional,  geographic,  and  cultural
determinants of growth; the East Asian Miracle; the middle income trap; the political economy of
growth; growth and inequality; and theories and evidence about the persistence of poverty in the
world's poorest regions.

Here is what I am thinking of doing for the first lecture:

Longest-Run Global Economic Growth


Date

Technological
Ideas-Stock
Growth        Rate h

Technological
Ideas Stock

Level H (1870 = 1)

Average Annual
Real Income per
Capita y

Total Human    Total Real
Population L World Income

(millions)   Y (billions)


-48000

-8000

-6000

-3000

-1000

1

0.0011 %

0.011 %

0.013%

0.030%

0.061 %

0.0256

0.040

0.051

0.074

0.14

0.25

$1,200

$1,200

$900

$900

$900

$900

1

2.5

7

15

50

170

$1.20

$3.0

$6.3

$14

$45

$153


800

1500

1770

1870

2010

2100

0.022%             0.30           $900          240          $216

0.052%             0.43           $900          500          $450

0.149%             0.64          $1,100          750          $825

0.442%              1.0          $1,300         1300        $1,690

2.125%             19.6         $10,526         7600        $80,000

2.000%            118.4         $58,518         9000       $526,665

Take the square-root of what we think is the total world population and multiply it by our very 
crude measures of average real income per capita, and call that a€cetechnologya€Da€”the value H of 
the stock of useful ideas about manipulating nature and organizing humans discovered, invented, 
developed, and deployed globally into the world economy. Normalize H by setting its value in 1870
equal to 1.

Why take the square-root? Well, if we just multiplied average income by populationa€’’called total 
world real income a€cetechnologya€Da€”we would be implicitly assuming that labor is useless and 
unproductive. But that cannot be right: each mouth comes with two eyes, two hands, and a brain. If 
we just took average incomea€’’called that a€cetechnologya€Da€”we would be implicitly
assuming that natural resources are unimportant, and that it does not matter how small population 
growth has reduced the size of the average plot of land on which a typical persona€™ s food is to 
be grown. That also cannot be right: resource scarcity, and attempts to compensate for it, are a 
very real thing in our world, today and in our past.

The square-root is a compromise. Is it the right compromise? We can argue about that. What would 
you suggest?


There is alsoa€”I must admita€’’worries about the average income estimates. Styles of life and the 
relative prices of commodities are so different between the upper-middle class of the global north 
today and Neolithic near-subsistence farmers and Paleolithic gatherer-hunters that a 
one-dimensional a€oereal incomea€D measure may not have much income. Plus there is the fact that 
our income

measures add things up based on what they cost, but the measure we want is what we spend our income 
on is worth to us. The difference is what economists call a€oeconsumer surplusa€D. (I think I have 
a memory of economist Robert Barro saying or writing somewhere that for a rival-material good 
consumer surplus was probably, on average, about equal to factor cost; but that for a non-rival
attention-information good the ratio was likely to be much larger: perhaps five or ten to one. That 
struck me as very smart, and likely to be true. But I have been unable to find this anywhere.)

Nathan Mayer Rothschild, the richest man in the first half of the 1800s, died in his fifties of an 
infected abscess in his butta€”something we would cure with a lancing and a single dose of 
amoxicillin, followed by being yelled at by a medtech for having let it get so bad before asking 
for help. Does that mean that every single one of us with access to modern antibiotics is, properly 
assessed, richer
than Nathan Mayer Rothschild was? In a profound sense, yes.

I once got ten pounds of potatoes at Trader Joea€™ s for a dollar. Thata€™ s 0.005 cents per 
calorie. At the California minimum wage, that is about 1 second of work for 100 calories. For a 
Neolithic near-subsistence farmer, about half your work-time has to be devoted just to getting 
calories, and your productivity is maybe 10000 calories for half-a-daya€™ s work: 2500 
calories/hour, or 2
minutes for 100 calories. Are we thus not the 12 times that the table above presents but rather 100 
times richer on average than our predecessors? Perhaps. But there are also things we value that 
take just as much of our labor-time to obtain today as 5000 years ago, the respect of our peers 
high among them. And there are things we value today that our predecessors could not obtain at any
pricea€”like amoxicillin. What is the proper average summary statistic of all of these 
multi-dimensions of economic growth? Is there a proper average summary statistic?

Return to the table with which I began:

Longest-Run Global Economic Growth


Date

-48000

Technological
Ideas-Stock
Growth        Rate h

Technological
Ideas Stock

Level H (1870 = 1)

0.0256

Average Annual
Real Income per
Capita y

$1,200

Total Human Total Real
Population L World Income

(millions)Y (billions)

1         $1.20


-8000

0.0011 %            0.040

$1,200

2.5          $3.0



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Picture:

COVID Death Incidence Rate per 100,000 Population by 2020 Presidential Vote
(14-day moving average)

Data Sources:

MIT Election Data and Science Lab
https://electionlab.mit.edu/data

Johns Hopkins Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE)
https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/about/how-to-use-our-data

Dpm 60-79%


10:42 AM • Dec 15, 2021 • Twitter Web App

Very Briefly Noted:

• Ben Thompson: The Great Bifurcation <https://stratechery.com/2021/the-great-bifurcation/>

• Terry Crowley: Yuck, Office HTML'. a€~Who wouldna€™ t want to read about the challenges of how to 
encode an empty paragraph in HTML?a€! 
<https://terrvcrowley.medium.com/vuck-office-html-7a249c24e57f>

• Elizabeth Heritage: Turns Out the Much-Maligneda€ce Mysteries of Udolphoa€£Ms Good, 
AcrMaZZy/<https://www.tor.com/2021/12/14/turns-out-the-much-maligned-mysteries-of-udolpho-is-good-ac
tuallv/>

•  Brad DeLong: As Cosma Shalizi Says, a€o?The Singularity Is in Our    
<https://delong.typepad.com/sdi/2013/Q3/as-cosma-shalizi-says-the-singularity-is-in-our-past-saturda
y-twentieth-century-economic-history-weblogging.html>

Paragraphs:

Bryce Baschuk: a€™ The leading economies of the Asia-Pacific region are steadily moving forward 
with trade liberalization initiatives that may ultimately leave the U.S. out in the colda€!. Japan 
is apparently holding out for a better deal on steel and aluminuma€!. This isna€™ t particularly 
surprising, though. Ever since Trumpa€™ s metal fight began in 2018, Japan has taken a higher road
than other nations when it came to sparring with the U.Sa€!. Japan filed a complaint under the 
WTOa€™s lengthy dispute settlement process and engaged in bilateral talksa€!. Japan has 
consistently urged the U.S. to rejoin the 11-member Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for 
Trans-Pacific Partnership^!. This week, South Korea signaled its interest in joining the CPTPPa€!. 
And in
two weeks the 15-nation Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership will enter into force, creating 
a Chinese-backed partnership that encompasses 2.2 billion people with a combined GDP of about $26 
trilliona€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/bbaschuk>

Leszek Kolakowski: My Correct Views on Everything: Reply to E.P. Thompson'. a€~Your letter contains 
some personal grievances and some arguments on general questions. I will start with a minor 
personal grievancea€!. You seem to feel offended by not having been invited to the Reading 
conference and you state that if you had been invited you would have refused to attenda€!. I 
presume,
consequently, that if you had been invited, you would have felt offended as wella€!. The moral 
ground you cite is the fact that in the organizing Committee you found the name of Robert Cecila€! 
[who] once worked in the British diplomatic servicea€!. Your integrity does not allow you to sit at 
the same table with someone who used to work in British diplomacy. O, blessed Innocence! You and
I,    we were both active in our respective Communist Parties in the 40s and 50sa€!. We supported, 
within our modest means, a regime based on mass slave labour and police terror of the worst 
kinda€!. Do you not think that there are many people who could refuse to sit at the same table with 
us?a€!

LINK: <https://socialistregister.com/index.php/srv/article/view/5323/2224>

Luke Oa€™Neil: I Asked to Leave & They Told Me Ia€™ dBe Fired'. a€~The U.S. is the most special 
nation in the history of the worlda€!. I dona€™ t really know what hell is but I dona€™t think 
ita€™s a place where bad things happen to people randomly such as natural disasters and death 
because thata€™s just what the regular world is. I think ita€™ s probably more accurate to say
ita€™ s a place where bad things happen because someone wanted them to happen to you or just let 
them happen out of negligence and indifference. Where bad things happen and they didna€™ t have to 
but your life was less important to someone else than what they thought they had to gaina€!

LINK:


Welcome to Hell World

I asked to leave and they told me Ia€™ d be fired

The other day I wrote in here about civil asset forfeiture and I heard from a reader that worked in 
that realm for a while. It was not a pleasant experience you wona€™ t be surprised to hear. a€oel 
didna€™ t come from any line of attorneys (or any semblance of money) so my only option to get 
resume building experienced!

Read more

a year ago A- 10 likes A- 2 comments A- Luke O'Neil

Roy Edroso: The Stupid Party'. did™ ve talked here about how conservatives dond™ t really even seem 
to try to argue convincingly anymore, because the success of the Trump movement has taught them 
thered™ s no need for intellectual gymnastics or even, really, coherent thoughtd”they just have to 
make bellicose MAGA noises and like-minded people will flock to the soundd!
LINK:


Edroso Breaks It Down

The Stupid Party

Youa€™ re probably familiar with the old adage that puns are the lowest form of humor. But thata€™ 
s not quite true. It takes some brainpower to make a pun. Even eminent humorists are known for 
them, like Dorothy Parkera€™ s a€oetoo fucking busy and vice versaa€D and S.J. Perelmana€™ s a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 29 likes A- 52 comments A- Roy Edroso

Arthur Eckstein: READING: How Was It That Rome Conquered the Mediterranean & Created Its Pax 
Romana, Anyway?'. a€~The abilitya€”nay the eagernessa€”to turn conquered peoples into Romans was 
the keya€L Rome after 340a€“338 replaced ethnicity and geographical location as the basis of 
membership in the polity with a ladder of legal status-groups not tied to eithera€!. non­
Roman allies (the socii), halfway citizens (the cives sine suffagio), full citizens (cives)a€!. the 
Romans werea€! generous in allowing non-Roman individuals and even (very occasionally) whole 
non-Roman polities to climb up this status hierarchy, Rome gained an enhanced capacity to win 
loyaltya€!. The capacity for inclusion and integration^!. The rewards Rome was culturally and
politically capable of dispensinga€! local peacea€! [and] the inclusion of local elites in the 
Roman state were much greater than any state in Greece could ever offera€!. It was the system of 
inclusion, which was ultimately a diplomatic and political skilla€! that made Rome potentially the 
most powerful state in the ancient Mediterranean^!

LINK:


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

READING: How Was It That Rome Conquered the Mediterranean & Created Its Pax Romana, Anyway?

Arthur Eckstein (2006): Mediterranean Anarchy, Interstate War, & the Rise of Rome (Berkeley: 
University of California Press): a€~The fundamental question is not why Roman society was 
militaristic and often at war, but why the Roman city-state was able to create a very large and 
durable territorial polity when so many other city-states failed at that taska€!

Read more

a year ago A- Brad DeLong
Leave a comment

Subscribe now


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

READING: How Was It That Rome Conquered the Mediterranean & Created Its Pax Romana, Anyway?

Arthur Eckstein (2006): Mediterranean Anarchy, Interstate War, & the Rise of Rome (Berkeley: 
University of California Press): a€~The fundamental question is not why Roman society was 
militaristic and often at war, but why the Roman city-state was able to create a very large and 
durable territorial polity when so many other city-states failed at that taska€!

Read more

a year ago A- Brad DeLong
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

