Subscribe now

First:

This is NUTS. & GENIUS. GENIUS-NUTS:

On startup, the Apple Silicon Ml notices that it has lots of background and housekeeping work to 
doa€”mds_stores, bird, cloudd, kernel_task, & c.a€”and so it starts doing it. It immediately 
full-throttles all four of its IceStorm efficiency cores.

Then I start working. And it responds, giving me FireStorm core #5, with occasional spillover to 
FireStorm core #6, holding FireStorm cores #7 & #8 in reserve, just so if I ask it to do anything 
heavy, it can respond instantaneously, rather than get caught up on its background and housekeeping 
by letting those processes onto the
performance cores.

Leta€™ s see if I can get it in geara€! Here I have an unconverted terabyte zoom session lying 
arounda€!
PEDAL to the METAL, Commander!

Core 1 — Efficiency

COTA 9 — Efficiency


Core 3 — Efficiency
Core 4 — Efficiency
Core  5 — Performance
Core 6 — Performance
Core 7 — Performance
Core 8 — Performance

Zoom & MacOS are not able to feed the FireStorm cores fast enough to fully-occupy all four of them, 
but it definitely gets us to a heavy workloada€!
And yet the fan never goes on. The thermal envelope of the machine is so far from being a 
constraint that it needs no boosting at all.

I havena€™t felt like this with the performance delta of a new machine since the high tick-tock 
days of Moorea€™ s Law, back before the beginning of the Great Recession:

Moore's Law: The number of transistors on microchips doubles every two years   Our World

in Da^

Transistor count

50.000.000.000

I )(

0(


500,000,000

100,000,000

50,000,000

10,000,000

5,000,000

1,000,000

500.000

100,000

50,000

10,000

1,000


Jata source: Wikipedia (wikipedia.org/wiki/iransistor_count)

Year in which the microchip was first introduced

3urWoridinData.org - Research and data to make progress against the world's largest problems. 
Licensed under CC-BY by                    H.

But I do wish this from <http://anandtech.com> said a€ceTSMC-Applea€D or a€oeApple-TSMCa€n rather 
than just a€ceApplea€D. TSMC is doing a lot of the heavier lifting here:

Intel vs Apple Top Performance

Apple    63.3

10900K, 58.6

9900K, 54.3


o
in

6700K, 45.6

7700K, 49.2                    1185G7, 55.3

Apple A13, 54.9



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Patrick Wyman: Indo-Europeans and the Yamnaya Culture 
<https://patrickwvman.substack.eom/p/indo-europeans-and-the-vamnava-culture>

• Wikipedia: Bigos <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bigos>

• Frances Coppola: TetheraC™ s Smoke & Mirrors 
<https://www.coppolacomment.com/2021/05/tethers-smoke-and-mirrors.html>

• Allrecipes: Polish Golobki (Gawumpki) Recipe 
<https://www.allrecipes.com/recipe/223270/polish-golobki-gawumpki/>

•  Tracy Alloway & Joe Weisenthal: How the Worlda€™s Companies Wound Up in a Deepening Supply Chain 
Nightmare'. a€~Not a day goes by where there isna€™t news of some new shortage or bottleneck. 
Chips, shipping containers, lumber, you name it. So how did it happen and how does it get 
unwound?a€!

•  Jon Gruber: The 2021 Ml iPad Pros'. a€~When the first iPad was introduced in 2010. But Steve 
Jobs took particular pride in talking about its system-on-a-chip, which, for the first time, Apple 
gave a name to: the A4. Two years after their acquisition of chip maker PA Semia€”which in 
hindsight was clearly one of
the best acquisitions in the history of businessla€’’the A4 was the first chip Apple was willing to 
take credit for and brag abouta€! <https://daringfireball.net/2021/05/the_2021. ml. _ipad_pros>

Paragraphs:

Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. Our problem now is to get the country vaccinated, the 
boosters in preparation, the economy reopen, and full employment reattained. Inflation over the 
next year and a half is an aid to that. The problem of controlling inflation is a problem for 2023 
and beyond, which means that the
Federal Reserve should start thinking about it and acting to prepare for it in mid-2022, not now. 
So I wish Noah Smith were writing now about how to make reattaining full employment go smoothly, 
not painting bad-case inflation scenarios:

Noah Smith: When to Worry About Inflation'. a€~Joe Weisenthal notes that if you take out used cars 
and trucks, core inflation (which already takes out food and energy) only ran at a little over 2% 
in April. The used car shortage, he argues, was due to highly specific factorsa€!. The inflation of 
the last two
months is probably a blipa€!. But there actually is a scary inflation scenarioa€!. 1) cost-push 
inflation from supply bottlenecks a€”> 2) Fed is afraid to raise rates because it would tank the 
economy and/or increase government borrowing costs a€”> 3) businesses decide that the Fed is no 
longer willing to
contain inflation a€”> 4) businesses start raising prices rapidly leading to high and sustained 
inflationa€!. Inflation is a weird thing., a coordination gamea€! happens when people think 
inflation is going to happena€!. By pulling out the bazooka, Paul Volcker convinced America that 
the Fed would do
whatever it took to beat down inflation. He carried out a reA©ime shift in policy, which in turn 
generated a rA©gime shift in expectationsa€!. High and persistent inflation will return if the 
opposite rA©gime shift happensa€!. [If] inflation stays significantly above 2% for quite some 
timea€! and the Fed
doesna€™ t hike ratesa€!. If policymakers start seriously talking about price controls as a way to 
manage inflation, ita€™ s a very bad sign. If you look at episodes of inflation, theya€™re usually 
preceded by a failed regime of price controlsa€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/when-to-worrv-about-inflation>

Very true from Paul Krugman: a€oeAnyone can offer praise for qualities a man actually has; only the 
truly subservient will humiliate themselves by offering flattery totally untethered from 
realitya€la€D That is, I think, the explanation for the obsequious dAOrogeance of Republicans like 
Tomas Philipson and Kevin McCarthy:
only by abandoning any reputation they had for not routinely lying can they demonstrate that they 
are properly loyal to Donald Trump. In what coin they expect a man who is not very healthy and 
already 74 to reward them for their dAOrogeance is not clear:

Paul Krugman: The Strange Death of American mMdesty: a€~Once upon a time Republican leaders posed 
as regular guys even when they were anything buta€!. Today, of course, the Republican Party has 
turned into a Trump personality cult, even though Donald Trumpa€™ s actual accomplishments
are hard to find. A failed nuclear deal with North Korea, a failed trade deal with China, a tax cut 
that never delivered the promised investment boom, a mishandled pandemic? Never mind. Obsequious 
professions of loyalty arena€™ t just expected, theya€™ ve become a requirement for those who want 
to
stay in the partya€!. Kevin McCarthy, the House minority leader, enthused about Trumpa€™ s physical 
vigor. (Hey, he drives a mean golf cart.)a€! Tomas Philipson, a Chicago economist who worked for a 
time in the White House, returned to academia, his parting letter praised the famously non-reading
Trump as someone whose a€oeeconomic instincts were on a par with many Nobel economists.a€D These 
absurditiesa€! are proof of loyalty. Anyone can offer praise for qualities a man actually has; only 
the truly subservient will humiliate themselves by offering flattery totally untethered from 
realitya€!

LINK: <https ://messaging-custom-newsletters .nytimes .com/template/oakv2>

Dan Pfeiffer watches Republicans trying to replay their 2009-10 playbook: betting on a weak 
recovery and then on blaming the bad policies of the Democratic President for it. Any unemployment 
remaining in October 2022 will be the fault of enhanced U.I. This time, however, they do not have a 
cautious President Obama who
wants to undershoot the return to full employmenta€”to close only half the output gapa€”and who 
will further water down his policies away from what is best for the country in a fruitless search 
for bipartisan comity. If the Republicans win this one, it will not be because of any triangulation 
by Biden, but rather because of
Manchin and Sinemaa€™ s triangulation:

Dan Pfeiffer: The Republicans Return to a€~47 Pere enta€™ Politics'. a€~The hottest trend in 
Republican politics is taking money away from their constituents, presumably for the purpose of 
owning the libs. Over the last couple of weeks, more than eleven states run by Republican governors 
have
ended their statesa€™ participation in the enhanced unemployment benefits programa€!. The most 
important point to remember about the enhanced U.I. issue is that the Republican argument is almost 
entirely bullshita€!. Republicans are dealing with a political paradox. The narrow Democratic
majorities, the map. and history suggests that the 2022 elections should be a great opportunity for 
Republicans. But President Biden is very popular, and his agenda is even more populara€!. Given an 
array of bad options, the party has decided to once again run against a€oebig government,a€D If
government   is seen by the voters as relief checks, vaccines, small business loans, and rebuilt 
roads and bridges, the Democrats will succeed. The Republican obsession over the supposed 
generosity of the unemployment benefits is part of a desperate effort to change the focus. This an 
uphill battle for the
ReDublicansa€!


LINK: <https://messagebox.substack.eom/p/republicans-re-embrace-romnev-nomics>

GAME & SET TO: Chris Best, Hamish McKenzie, and SubStack on their quest to <strike>relieve venture 
capitalists of some of their excess money & burn it</strike> build the New Discursive Habermasian 
Jerusalem & sleeve it in the flesh of the Second Coming of the Blogosphere!!

Anne Trubek: Paying Writers & Pitying Men\ a€~People are continuing to talk about Substack, but few 
are discussing what I find the most interesting part: people are paying! Individuals are choosing 
to subscribe. Ita€™ s extraordinary a€ I. What startles me are not the advances the company pays, 
but
the sheer number of individuals who volunteer to become paid subscribers. More takes on this, 
please! (About 10% of you reading this have elected to become paid subscribers, and I am very 
grateful.1 If you want to join this lovely gang, herea€™ s the linka€”or waita€”leta€™ s do thisa€!

LINK: <https://notesfromasmallpress.substack.eom/p/paying-writers-and-pitying-men>

I thinka€”I hopea€”that in the end historians will conclude that America was so lucky that the 
first fascist it had who tried to seize power was off-scale both in his grittiness, his 
incompetence, and his clownishness. It could, already, have gone much, much worse:

Jeet Heer: Two Paths to a Military Coup'. a€~On the one hand, Trump tried to use the military as 
his personal toya€! surrounded himself with generalsa€l had big paradesa€l pardoned war 
criminalsa€l wanted to use the military to crack down on protesters. Trumpa€™ s baneful effect 
continues with a
raft of retired generals (echoing their French counterparts) proclaiming conspiracy theories about 
the electiona€l. The good news is that the military resisteda€!. But this resistance came at a 
price. Because from the start the military leadership didna€™ t respect Trump and because he was 
too ill-informed
to shape policy, civilian-military relations broke down. The Pentagon carried out policy for four 
years often in open defiance of the duly elected presidenta€l. Trump was foiled at every turn by 
both the staff he himself assembled and also the national security establishments. The sabotaging of
Trumpa€™ s agenda involved lying to hima€!. The Axios article should disturb anyone who believes in 
democracya€!. Trumpa€™ s weak and buffoonish authoritarianism incited two competing types of 
military coups: a coup by the military brass against Trump and a coup by Trumpists against the
constitutional ordera€!

LINK: <https://jeetheer.substack .com/p/two-paths-to-a-military-coup>

Is the official CCP take on Mao still a€oetwo parts good, one part bada€U? Mitt Romney needs to 
work harder to raise his a€oeparts gooda€D score. Just saying:

Daniel Larison: No, China Is Not an a€~Existential Threata€™: a€~Romney likes to present himself as 
something of a responsible elder statesman of the Republican Party, but with his alarmism about 
China he is falling back into the same pattern of hawkish hyperbole that made him such a ridiculous
presidential candidatea€l

LINK: <https://daniellarison.substack.eom/p/no-china-is-not-an-existential-threat>

Longer:

I confess old Alexa€™ s confidence that a€oethe science of politics, however, like most other 
sciences, has received great improvementa€D since the days when the Athenians could vote to execute 
all the men and old women in Mytilene, and enslave the rest, and then on Tuesday overturn their 
decision and send out another
message ship, hoping that it would catch up before the massacre had been accomplished:

Alexander Hamilton: The Federalist Papers No. 9: a€~It is impossible to read the history of the 
petty republics of Greece and Italy without feeling sensations of horror and disgust at the 
distractions with which they were continually agitated, and at the rapid succession of revolutions 
by which they were
kept in a state of perpetual vibration between the extremes of tyranny and anarchy. If they exhibit 
occasional calms, these only serve as short-lived contrast to the furious storms that are to 
succeed. If now and then intervals of felicity open to view, we behold them with a mixture of 
regret, arising from the
reflection that the pleasing scenes before us are soon to be overwhelmed by the tempestuous waves 
of sedition and party rage. If momentary rays of glory break forth from the gloom, while they 
dazzle us with a transient and fleeting brilliancy, they at the same time admonish us to lament 
that the vices of
government should pervert the direction and tarnish the lustre of those bright talents and exalted 
endowments for which the favored soils that produced them have been so justly celebrated.

From the disorders that disfigure the annals of those republics the advocates of despotism have 
drawn arguments, not only against the forms of republican government, but against the very 
principles of civil liberty a€ I. It is not to be denied that the portraits they have sketched of 
republican government
were too just copies of the originals from which they were taken. If it had been found 
impracticable to have devised models of a more perfect structure, the enlightened friends to 
liberty would have been obliged to abandon the cause of that species of government as indefensible.

The science of politics, however, like most other sciences, has received great improvement. The 
efficacy of various principles is now well understood, which were either not known at all, or 
imperfectly known to the ancients. The regular distribution of power into distinct departments; the 
introduction of
legislative balances and checks; the institution of courts composed of judges holding their offices 
during good behavior; the representation of the people in the legislature by deputies of their own 
election: these are wholly new discoveries, or have made their principal progress towards 
perfection in
modern times. They are means, and powerful means, by which the excellences of republican government 
may be retained and its imperfections lessened or avoideda€l

LINK: <https://avalon.law.yale.edu/18th century/fed09 .asp>

A very smart catch by Buce here:

Buce: Kissinger Gazes into the Chinese Mirror. a€~I feel a warm personal relationship with Henry 
Kissinger and China because he once got me kicked out of a hotel in Kashgar. Nothing personal, 
really: apparently the rule is that when the Chinese elite want to move in a distinguished visitor, 
everybody
gets bumped, including the paying customersa€!. If you take time to read Kissinger on China, the 
chances are that you already know something about China, and are hoping to learn something more 
about Kissingera€™ s viewsS.

What I suspect you get here is a lot of Kissinger on Kissingera€!. The point struck me early on 
when I read Kissingera€™ s sketch of Li Hongzhang, who dominated what passed for foreign policy 
under the decrepit Qing Dynasty late in the 19th Century. Herea€™ s Henry on Li:

Ambitious, impassive in the face of humiliation, supremely well versed in Chinaa€™ s classical 
tradition but uncommonly attuned to its peril, Li served for nearly four decades as Chinaa€™ s face 
to the outside world. He cast himself as the intermediary between the foreign
powersa€™ insistent demands for territorial and economic concessions and the Chinese courta€™ s 
expansive claims of political superiority. By definition his policies could never meet with either 
sidea€™ s complete approbation. Within China in particular Li left a controversial
legacy, especially among those urging a more confrontational course. Yet his effortsa€’’rendered 
infinitely more complex by the belligerence of the traditionalist faction of the Chinese courta€l

When Henry says a€oe[a]mbitious, impassive in the face of humiliation, supremely well versed,a€D 
surely he is thinking of himself? So also a€oehis policies could never meet with either sidea€™ s 
complete approbationa€Da€”? And perhaps most: a€oecontroversiala€l especially among those urging
a more confrontational course.a€Da€I

Ita€™ s perhaps difficult to recall the shock and impotent rage Kissnger and his boss the Emperor 
President withstood from their old allies on the right when they so shattered Cold War orthodoxies 
by establishing as relationship with our great enemy. The only other betrayal of equal magnitude 
would be
when Ronald Reagan yanked the pins out from under the Neocons by sitting down to chat with Mikhail 
Gorbacheva€l

LINK: <https://underbellv-buce.blogspot.com/2011/09/kissinger-gazes-into-chinese-mirror.html>

Why cana€™t I find MO AR articles like this one to read?:

Howard Oakley: How Ml Macs Feel Faster than Intel Models: Ita€™s About QoS'. a€~Whether Intel or 
ARM cores, macOS has to manage how tasks are run side-by-side on the same processora€!. The 
developer puts the code and data into an Operation, like a task, which can then be run on one or
more cores at a time. Two common features which they can specify are the maximum number of 
concurrent operations, and their importance, or Quality of Service (QoS)a€!. Apple provides four 
QoS levels, and a fifth which leaves it up to macOS to decidea€l.

On an Intel Xeon W 8-core processor, when therea€™ s no competing processes, all QoS settings 
result in the operation being performed as quickly as possible. My test 10 GB filea€l 5.6 to 6.6 
secondsa€l. When there were competing operationsa€l running one compression at a QoS of 9 
(background)
and another at 33 (userlnteractive), the process with the higher QoSa€l completed in normal time, 
and that with the lower QoSa€l taking as much as 24 secondsa€l. Hyperthreading was seen in Activity 
Monitor, with virtual second cores taking some of the additional loada€!.

Similar tests on an Mla€!. All operations with a QoS of 9 (background) were run exclusively on the 
four Efficiency (Icestorm) cores, even when that resulted in their being fully loaded and the 
Performance cores remaining idlea€l. With a QoS of 9 (background), the standard compression task 
took
38a€“43 seconds, changing little with loading of higher QoS operations. When two intensive 
background tasks were run at the same time, one completed in that same time (40 seconds), while the 
other took almost twice the time (77 seconds), both remaining constrained to using the Efficiency 
coresa€!.
With higher QoSa€l completed in much the same time as when run alone, and that with the lower QoS 
extended to around 15.5 secondsa€!.

The pattern of use of cores is that almost all the activities of macOS are run on the Efficiency 
cores, with only the occasional blip on the Performance cores. Running apps and performing other 
user tasks is the other way around, with the brunt borne on the Performance^I. User tasks are more 
likely to
run with QoS of at least 17, and in many cases 25 and 33. As far as the processor goes, an Ml Mac 
is divided into two: the four Efficiency cores are there largely to run macOS and its many 
background tasks, freeing the four Performance cores for the apps which you run. It feels so much 
fastera€!.

Few events give a worse impression to the user than the interface slowing down in the face of a 
problem in the operating systema€!. Because those processes are handed over to the Efficiency 
cores, all they do now is slow other macOS background tasks, to which wea€™re much less 
sensitivea€!..
Because Macs with Intel processors cana€™ t segregate their tasks onto different cores in the same 
way, when macOS starts to choke on something it affects user processes tooa€!

LINK: 
<https://eclecticlight.co/2021/05/17/how-ml-macs-feel-faster-than-intel-models-its-about-qos/>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€ I weblog-like newslettera€l here:


presidential candidatea€!

LINK: <https://daniellarison.substack.eom/p/no-china-is-not-an-existential-threat>

Longer:

I confess old Alexa€™ s confidence that a€oethe science of politics, however, like most other 
sciences, has received great improvementa€D since the days when the Athenians could vote to execute 
all the men and old women in Mytilene, and enslave the rest, and then on Tuesday overturn their 
decision and send out another
message ship, hoping that it would catch up before the massacre had been accomplished:

Alexander Hamilton: The Federalist Papers No. 9: a€~It is impossible to read the history of the 
petty republics of Greece and Italy without feeling sensations of horror and disgust at the 
distractions with which they were continually agitated, and at the rapid succession of revolutions 
by which they were
kept in a state of perpetual vibration between the extremes of tyranny and anarchy. If they exhibit 
occasional calms, these only serve as short-lived contrast to the furious storms that are to 
succeed. If now and then intervals of felicity open to view, we behold them with a mixture of 
regret, arising from the
reflection that the pleasing scenes before us are soon to be overwhelmed by the tempestuous waves 
of sedition and party rage. If momentary rays of glory break forth from the gloom, while they 
dazzle us with a transient and fleeting brilliancy, they at the same time admonish us to lament 
that the vices of
government should pervert the direction and tarnish the lustre of those bright talents and exalted 
endowments for which the favored soils that produced them have been so justly celebrated.

From the disorders that disfigure the annals of those republics the advocates of despotism have 
drawn arguments, not only against the forms of republican government, but against the very 
principles of civil libertya€!. It is not to be denied that the portraits they have sketched of 
republican government
were too just copies of the originals from which they were taken. If it had been found 
impracticable to have devised models of a more perfect structure, the enlightened friends to 
liberty would have been obliged to abandon the cause of that species of government as indefensible.

The science of politics, however, like most other sciences, has received great improvement. The 
efficacy of various principles is now well understood, which were either not known at all, or 
imperfectly known to the ancients. The regular distribution of power into distinct departments; the 
introduction of
legislative balances and checks; the institution of courts composed of judges holding their offices 
during good behavior; the representation of the people in the legislature by deputies of their own 
election: these are wholly new discoveries, or have made their principal progress towards 
perfection in
modern times. They are means, and powerful means, by which the excellences of republican government 
may be retained and its imperfections lessened or avoideda€!

LINK: <https ://avalon .law.yale .edu/18th century/fed09 ,asp>

A very smart catch by Buce here:

Buce: Kissinger Gazes into the Chinese Mirror. a€~I feel a warm personal relationship with Henry 
Kissinger and China because he once got me kicked out of a hotel in Kashgar. Nothing personal, 
really: apparently the rule is that when the Chinese elite want to move in a distinguished visitor, 
everybody
gets bumped, including the paying customersa€!. If you take time to read Kissinger on China, the 
chances are that you already know something about China, and are hoping to learn something more 
about Kissingera€™ s viewsa€!.

What I suspect you get here is a lot of Kissinger on Kissingera€!. The point struck me early on 
when I read Kissingera€™ s sketch of Li Hongzhang, who dominated what passed for foreign policy 
under the decrepit Qing Dynasty late in the 19th Century. Herea€™ s Henry on Li:

Ambitious, impassive in the face of humiliation, supremely well versed in Chinaa€™ s classical 
tradition but uncommonly attuned to its peril, Li served for nearly four decades as Chinaa€™ s face 
to the outside world. He cast himself as the intermediary between the foreign
powersa€™ insistent demands for territorial and economic concessions and the Chinese courta€™ s 
expansive claims of political superiority. By definition his policies could never meet with either 
sidea€™ s complete approbation. Within China in particular Li left a controversial
legacy, especially among those urging a more confrontational course. Yet his effortsa€’’rendered 
infinitely more complex by the belligerence of the traditionalist faction of the Chinese courta€!

When Henry says a€oe[a]mbitious, impassive in the face of humiliation, supremely well versed,a€D 
surely he is thinking of himself? So also a€oehis policies could never meet with either sidea€™ s 
complete approbation^ Da€”? And perhaps most: a€oecontroversiala€! especially among those urging
a more confrontational course.a€Da€!

Ita€™ s perhaps difficult to recall the shock and impotent rage Kissnger and his boss the Emperor 
President withstood from their old allies on the right when they so shattered Cold War orthodoxies 
by establishing as relationship with our great enemy. The only other betrayal of equal magnitude 
would be
when Ronald Reagan yanked the pins out from under the Neocons by sitting down to chat with Mikhail 
Gorbacheva€!

LINK: <https://underbelly-buce.blogspot.com/2011/09/kissinger-gazes-into-chinese-mirror.html>

Why cana€™t I find MO AR articles like this one to read?:

Howard Oakley: How Ml Macs Feel Faster than Intel Models: Ita€™ s About QoS'. a€~Whether Intel or 
ARM cores, macOS has to manage how tasks are run side-by-side on the same processora€!. The 
developer puts the code and data into an Operation, like a task, which can then be run on one or
more cores at a time. Two common features which they can specify are the maximum number of 
concurrent operations, and their importance, or Quality of Service (QoS)a€!. Apple provides four 
QoS levels, and a fifth which leaves it up to macOS to decidea€!.

On an Intel Xeon W 8-core processor, when therea€™ s no competing processes, all QoS settings 
result in the operation being performed as quickly as possible. My test 10 GB filea€! 5.6 to 6.6 
secondsa€L When there were competing operationsa€! running one compression at a QoS of 9 
(background)
and another at 33 (userlnteractive), the process with the higher QoSa€! completed in normal time, 
and that with the lower QoSa€! taking as much as 24 secondsa€!. Hyperthreading was seen in Activity 
Monitor, with virtual second cores taking some of the additional loada€!.

Similar tests on an Mla€!. All operations with a QoS of 9 (background) were run exclusively on the 
four Efficiency (Icestorm) cores, even when that resulted in their being fully loaded and the 
Performance cores remaining idlea€L With a QoS of 9 (background), the standard compression task took
38a€“43 seconds, changing little with loading of higher QoS operations. When two intensive 
background tasks were run at the same time, one completed in that same time (40 seconds), while the 
other took almost twice the time (77 seconds), both remaining constrained to using the Efficiency 
coresa€!.
With higher QoSa€! completed in much the same time as when run alone, and that with the lower QoS 
extended to around 15.5 secondsa€!.

The pattern of use of cores is that almost all the activities of macOS are run on the Efficiency 
cores, with only the occasional blip on the Performance cores. Running apps and performing other 
user tasks is the other way around, with the brunt borne on the Performance^!. User tasks are more 
likely to
run with QoS of at least 17, and in many cases 25 and 33. As far as the processor goes, an Ml Mac 
is divided into two: the four Efficiency cores are there largely to run macOS and its many 
background tasks, freeing the four Performance cores for the apps which you run. It feels so much 
fastera€!.

Few events give a worse impression to the user than the interface slowing down in the face of a 
problem in the operating systema€!. Because those processes are handed over to the Efficiency 
cores, all they do now is slow other macOS background tasks, to which wea€™re much less 
sensitivea€!..
Because Macs with Intel processors cana€™ t segregate their tasks onto different cores in the same 
way, when macOS starts to choke on something it affects user processes tooa€!

LINK: 
<https://eclecticlight.co/2021/05/17/how-ml-macs-feel-faster-than-intel-models-its-about-qos/>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

