Subscribe now

Earlier today Eric Rauchway @rauchway wrote that people should take a look at my 2009-03-31 
testimony that Sen Sherrod Brown (D-OH) invited me to give:

Eric Rauchway @rauchway

or see @delong's Congressional testimony of 2009

books .google .comLessons from the New Deal
8:40 PM r™ Apr 27,2020

72Likes2Re tweets

He is right: my 2009-03-31 testimony is damned good!

LESSONS FROM THE NEW DEAL: HEARING BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC POLICY OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
BANKING, HOUSING, AND URBAN AFFAIRS :: UNITED STATES SENATE :: ONE HUNDRED ELEVENTH CONGRESS :: 
FIRST SESSION
ON:

WHAT LESSONS CAN CONGRESS LEARN FROM THE NEW DEAL THAT CAN HELP DRIVE OUR ECONOMY TODAY?
MARCH 31,2009

Printed for the use of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs

(Available at: <http://www.access.gpo.gov/congress/senate/senate05sh.html>) U.S. GOVERNMENT 
PRINTING OFFICE 53a€“161 PDF WASHINGTON : 2009a€!
Share

WRITTEN PREPARED STATEMENT OF J. BRADFORD DELONG
PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA AT BERKELEY
MARCH 31,2009

Chairman Brown, Senator DeMint, other Members of the Committee: It is always an honor to be invited 
here to participate in a small part in our self-rule via representative government here in the 
oldest and strongest and most successful large Republic in the world. We today face an economic 
crisis, and a crisis that has few parallels. Thus we are driven back to historical analogies. It 
can be said that eco- nomic theory
is always crystallized history, is always us drawing on lessons from the past. But usually enough 
of the past has gone into making the theory that we are happy with the crystallized version. For 
this crisis, however, there is only one even close past parallel: the Great Depression and the New 
Deal. And so this time it is, I think, best to drink the history raw.

Drawing lessons from the New Deal for the Great Depression requires, first, understanding what the 
New Deal was. Franklin Delano Roosevelt took everything that was on the kitchen shelf and threw it 
into the pot on March 4,1933, and then began stirringa€’’fishing things out that seemed nasty (and 
watching the Supreme Court fish a bunch of stuff out too), adding spices, adding new ingredients as 
they came along,
all the while watching the thing cook and trying to turn it into some- thing tasty. Try every 
thinga€’’and then reinforce and extend the things that seem to be working well. Ellis Hawleya€™ s 
The New Deal and the Problem of Monopoly remains the best account of this process. As Franklin 
Delano Roosevelt said on May 23,1932:

The country needs and, unless I mistake its temper, the country demands bold, persistent 
experimentation. It is common sense to take a method and try it. If it fails, admit it frankly and 
try another. But above all, try something. The millions who are in want will not stand idly by 
silently forever while the things to satisfy their needs are within easy reach.

Figure 3 - Economic Fundamentals Recover

Index (1929= 100)

140


130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60 4--------- T--------r       ---------- I------- T--------T--------T--------I--------T-----

1929   1930   1931   1932   1933   1934   1935   1936   1937   1938   1939

Detrended productivity ■ ■ ■ Real bank deposits   Deflation


It is only after the fact that we can say what the New Deal was. And it is only after the fact that 
we can try to assess the parts of it that were worthwhile and the parts of it that were not. In the 
middle of it nobody was really sure what was going on.
I believe that in retrospect the New Deal is best divided into four components:

•  (a) income redistribution to level the gross inequalities and inequities that had grown so large 
in the Gilded Age;

•  (b) social insurance programs that diminished the risks that Americans would find themselves 
destitute and totally dependent on spotty and inadequate individual acts of charity;

• (c) structural reforms of the economy; and

•  (d) what we now call macroeconomic policya€”the governments™ s taking responsibility for and 
acting as the balance wheel on the aggregate flow of spending and thus production and employment.

Of these I believe (a) and (b), income redistribution and social insurance, surely made post-New 
Deal America a much better place but had little if any impact on recovery from the Great 
Depression. I also believe that (c), structural reforms of the economy, had little or no net impact 
on recovery as well. Some of the structural reforms appear to me to have been well thought- 
outa€”REA, NLRA, and Thurman
Arnolds™ s drives for enforcement of the antitrust laws come to mind. Others appear to me to have 
been neutral or worseS’’the NIRA and the PUHCA come to mind.

Indeed, last month I reread John Maynard KeynesS™ s two substantial letters to Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt in the 1930s and found that my conclusions were the same as those of Keynes, who 
protested:

[A] great deal of what is alleged against the wickedness of [utility] holding companies is surely 
wide of the mark.... No one has suggested a proce- dure by which the eggs can be unscrambled. Why 
not... leave the exist- ing organizations undisturbed, so long as the voting power is so rearranged 
... that it cannot be controlled by ... a minority ...?... Finally, the railroads  Whether

hereafter they are publicly owned or remain in pri- vate hands, it is a matter of national 
importance that they should be made solvent. Nationalise them if the time is ripe. If not, take 
pity  And here too let the dead bury their dead J

and:

You are engaged on a double task, Recovery and Reform ... For the first, speed and quick results 
are essential. The second may be urgent... but haste will be injurious, and wisdom of long-range 
purpose is more necessary than immediate achievement... [T]he order of urgency between measures of 
Recovery and measures of Reform has [not] been duly observed ... In particular, I cannot
detect any material aid to recovery in NIRA . .. The Act is on the Statute Book; a considerable 
amount has been done towards implementing it; but it might be better for the present to allow 
experience to accumulate ... NIRA, which is essentially Reform and probably im- pedes Recovery, has 
been put across too hastily, in the false guise of being part of the technique of Recovery .2

This leaves the fourth aspect of the New Deala€”the recovery-generating aspects” macroeconomic 
policy, which I also divide into four components:

• (a) conventional monetary expansion,

• (b) quantitative easing,

• (c) banking-sector recapitalization and regulation, and

• (d) fiscal policy expansion.

How effective was it? Let me pause to note that if this were 6 years ago in 2003 or 8 years ago in 
2001 we would all be taking it for granted that the expansionary monetary and fiscal policies of 
the types tried during the New Deal were effective. Indeed, had Senator McCain won the presidential 
election last November the members of this and the previous panel would include one or more senior 
McCain economic
advisors like Douglas Holtz Eakin, Kevin Hassett, or Mark ZandiS”all of whom would be arguing that 
New Deal-like monetary and fiscal stimulus programs were effective as part of the process of 
arguing for the McCain fiscal stimulus program or the McCain banking recapitalization program that 
would, had recent history taken another branch, now be moving through the Congress.

Back at the start of the Great Depression none of the major industrial powers of the world pursued 
expansionary macroeconomic policies. Instead, they held that that government is best which governs 
least as far as economic policy was concerned and bound themselves with the golden fetters of the 
classical gold standard. A balanced budget was necessary to maintain confidence that a country 
would maintain its gold
paritya€’’hence no fiscal policy expansion. Under the gold standard the do- mestic money supply was 
determined by the ebb and flow of gold reservesS’’hence no, or rather little, conventional monetary 
policy or quantitative easing. And under the gold standard countries except for Great Britain had 
very limited powers to sup- port or recapitalize their own banks: when Austria tried in 1931 it 
found itself faced with
an immediate choice of abandoning its banking policy or abandoning the gold standard.

So a New Deal was simply not possible as long as countries remained on the gold standard during the 
Great Depressions’’only after the golden fetters were cast off could the government even try to use 
its monetary, fiscal, and banking policy tools to promote recovery. This constraint gives us as 
clear evidence as we want that the New DealS”or rather New Deals, for each major industrial country 
during the Great
Depression had its ownS”mattered for recovery. We know when each of the five major industrial 
countries cast off the gold standard fetters and began its New Deal. We know how quickly each of 
them recovered from the Great Depression.

There is a strong rank correlation between how early a country abandoned gold and began its New 
Deal on the one hand and how rapid and complete its recovery was on the other, as this chart that I 
have reproduced from Eichengreen (1992) and then added to shows .3 Statisticians will tell you that 
if you thought before looking at the evidence summarized in this rank correlation that there was 
only a 50S“50 chance
that New Deals mattered for recovery, then after looking at this evidence you should rationally be 
95.2 percent sure that New Deals mattered.

We economists are pretty sure that all four components of macroeconomic policy helped. It is very 
hard to write down a model of the economy in which some tools work and others do not. All four 
operate through boosting spendingS’’conventional monetary policy and banking-recapitalization 
policy by lowering the interest rates that businesses seeking funding to spend on expanding 
capacity are charged, quan­
titative easing by putting cash in peoples™ s pockets that burns a hole through them if not spent, 
fiscal policy expansion by having the government spend directly. Any model of the economy in which 
increases in spending boost not just prices but pro- duction and employment will see all four be 
effective. Any model of the economy in which increases in spending just cause inflation but donS™ t 
boost employment
and output will see none of them be effectives’’but we already know that the odds of such being the 
right model are only 4.8 percent at best.

THE GREAT SLUMP REVISITED                         233

The Earlier You Abandon the Gold Standard in the Depression,

:he Faster Is Your Economic Recovery             |

Japan

150-


MJ-*!------------------ J----------------- 1----------------- 1-----------------1------------- 
“i------------------- 1        T

1929    1930    1931    1932    1933    1934    1935    1936    1937

Figure 5. Indices of industrial production, 1929-1937 (1929 = 100)

Source: League of Nations, World production and prices, 1937:8, p. 44.

Which of the four components of macroeconomic policy helped the most in the New Dealsa€™ aiding of 
recovery? That is a much more difficult question. The Depres- sion itself provides little evidence 
of the balance of power between monetary, bank- ing, and fiscal policy.

Christina Romer argues powerfully that quantitative easing was decisivea€”that a€~a€~nearly all the 
observed recovery of the U.S. economy [starting in 1933] prior to [the beginning of World War II] 
in 1942 was due to monetary expansion ,a€™4a€™ and this monetary expansion was entirely 
quantitative easing because conventional interest-rate open-market policy had been tapped out 
before the recovery
began. 4 One thing that students of the Great Depression do agree on is that it is next to 
impossible to evaluate how powerful fiscal policy expansion was in the Great Depression because it 
simply was not tried on a sufficiently large scale. As Eichengreen (1992) wrote a decade and a half 
ago:

In the U.S., the most important fiscal change of the period, in 1932, was a tax increase, not a 
reduction, observed budget deficits were small. Cyclically-corrected deficits were smaller still. 
This is the conclusion of Brown ... for the U.S.; Middleton ... for Britain; and Jonung ... for 
Sweden  In contrast, in countries like the U.S. (and to a lesser extent the U.K.) the [monetary] 
expansion of

currency and bank deposits was enor- mous. The one significant interruption to monetary expansion 
in the U.S., in 1937, revealingly coincided with the one significant interruption to eco- nomic 
recovery  Even in Sweden, renowned for having developed Keynesian fiscal policy before Keynes, 
monetary policy did most of the work.

For evidence of the ability of fiscal policy to boost employment and productiona€” if used on a 
sufficiently larges scalea€”we have to wait until World War II. Monetary policy contraction, 
banking-sector collapse, and the transformation of irrational exuberance into unwarranted pessimism 
carried the U.S. unemployment rate from 2.9 percent up to 22.9 percent from 1929 to 1932. Monetary 
expansion and banking re­
form then drove the unemnlovment rate down to 9.5 nercent bv the start of larpe- scale mobilization 
in 1940. And wartime government expenditure and deficits drove the unemnlovment rate down to 1.2 
nercent hv 1944.


Thus my belief is that the principal lessons of the Great Depression and the World War II eras for 
economic recovery are twofold:

1. The government should not sit on its hands. The French government sat on its hands, relying on 
its commitment to the gold standard and the equilibrium- restoring forces of the market to handle 
the Depression. As of 1937a€”eight years after the previous business-cycle peaka€”it was still 
waiting, like Japan in the 1990s, for the self-correcting forces of the marketplace to come to its 
res- cue.

2. All four macroeconomic policy tools are likely to have some power. A prudent policy will not 
rely on any of conventional monetary policy or quantitative eas- ing or fiscal expansion or banking 
policy alone, but will instead combine all foura€”and, like Roosevelt, seek to reinforce success.

The New Deal: Lessons for Today a€’’Questions and Answers

Q: How much has Ben Bernankea€™ s reputation suffered as a result of his failure to stop the 
recession?

A: I dona€™ t think Bernankea€™ s reputation as an economist has suffered at all. I think it is 
stronger than ever. Friedman and Schwartza€™ s Monetary History of the United States argued that 
the Federal Reserve all by itself could have stopped the Great Depression in its tracksa€”but did 
not. This thesis of The Monetary History of the United States has taken a profound hit over the 
last 2 years, for Ben Bernanke
hasa€”via open market operations and quantitative easinga€”done exactly what Friedmana€“Schwartz 
recommended and claimed would have stopped the Great Depression in its tracks. Yet we all now think 
that that is not enougha€”that we need banking policy and fiscal policy as well. And this is an 
intellectual loss for Friedmana€“ Schwartz. But it is an intellectual victory for 
Bernankea€“Keynes, who argued

that all the conventional interest rate and quantitative easing monetary policy in the world might 
not be enough if the capitalization of the banking sector vanished and the credit channel got 
itself well and truly wedged. This is where we seem to be.
Paul Krugman wrote:

Has anyone else noticed that the current crisis sheds light on one of the great controversies of 
economic history? A central theme of Keynesa€™ s Gen- eral Theory was the impotence of monetary 
policy in depression-type condi- tions. But Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, in their magisterial 
mone- tary history of the United States, claimed that the Fed could have pre- vented the Great
Depression ... if the Fed had done morea€”if it had ex- panded the monetary base faster and done 
more to rescue banks in trouble. So here we are, facing a new crisis reminiscent of thel930s. And 
this time the Fed has been spectacularly aggressive about expanding the monetary base: And guess 
whata€”it doesna€™t seem to be working well enough.

The Federal Reserve in the Great Depression

Q: Why do we need to do all this fiscal policy and banking policy stuff? Didna€™ t Milton Friedman 
and Anna Schwartz prove that the Federal Reserve caused the Great Depression by inept and 
destructive policies?

A: I think you have to be careful here. Friedman and Schwartza€™ s Monetary History of the United 
States argued not that the Federal Reserve caused the Great Depression but that the Federal Reserve 
all by itself could have stopped the Great Depressiona€”but did not.

This thesis of The Monetary History of the United States has taken a profound hit over the last 2 
years, for Ben Bernanke hasa€”via open market operations and quantitative easinga€”done exactly 
what Friedmana€“Schwartz recommended and claimed would have stopped the Great Depression in its 
tracks. Yet we all now think that that is not enougha€”that we need banking policy and fiscal 
policy as well.

Government Workers and Unemployment

Q: Amity Shlaes writes that the New Deal did not diminish unemployment mucha€”that unemployment was 
25 percent in 1933 and still 19 percent in 1938. Doesna€™t this prove that the New Deal was 
ineffective?

A: Amity Shlaes is using the Lebergott unemployment seriesa€”and Christie Romer wrote the book, 
literallya€”ita€™ s her dissertationa€”on what is wrong with the Lebergott series. The Romer series 
or the Weir series paints a very different picture: a fall in unemployment from 23 percent in 1932 
to 9 percent in 1937, a jump back up to 12 percent in the recession of 1938, and then a fall to 11 
percent in 1939.

As Bush Administration Commerce Undersecretary Michael Darby pointed out, the big difference 
between the series that matters here concerns their treatment of government relief workers: is 
someone working for the WPA or the CCC employed or unemployed? From the perspective of a€~a€~how 
good a job is the private sector doing at generating jobs,a€™ a€™ there is a case for counting them 
as unemployed.
But if the question is a€~a€~did the New Deal help?a€™ a€™ then there is absolutely no case at all 
for using the Lebergott series because WPA and CCC workers had jobs and were very glad to have 
them. Shlaes has, I think, simply not read the footnotes to the edition of Historical Statistics of 
the United States that she got her numbers out of.

Herbert Hoover

Q: Wasna€™ t the Great Depression really the fault of that dangerous leftist Herbert Hoover with 
all of his interventionist meddlings in the economy?

A: Herbert Hoover is an interesting case. He wanted to meddlea€”he wanted to be an activist 
presidenta€”but his Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon persuaded him not too. Mellon persuaded him to 
raise taxes during the Great Depression to assure investors that the U.S. would stay on the gold 
standard and not fund government spending by printing money. Mellon persuaded him to avoid 
expansionary monetary
policy of any kind. Herbert Hoover did call business leaders into the White House for conferences, 
and did plead with them not to fire workers or cut wages too much, but I have never been able to 
find any sign that this had an effecta€”no sign that industrialists called to the White House for 
meetings changed their business prac- tices in any way. Herbert Hoover did start the Reconstruction 
Finance Corporation, but
funded it at a very low level. Because of Mellona€™ s blocking position in the admin- istration, 
the New Deal could not get under way until 1933.

Afterwards, Herbert Hoover was very angry at himself for taking Mellona€™ s counsel and at Mellon 
for giving it. Until George W. Bush unleashed his White House staff to slime Paul Oa€™ Neill, 
Herbert Hoover held the record for the most vicious attack by a President on his own Secretary of 
the Treasury, writing in his memoirs that he was very sorry about the influence exercised by:

[T]he a€~a€~leave it alone liquidationistsa€™ a€™ headed by [my] Secretary of the Treas- ury 
Mellon, who felt that government must keep its hands off and let the slump liquidate itself. Mr. 
Mellon had only one formula: a€~a€~Liquidate labor, liquidate stocks, liquidate the farmers, 
liquidate real estate.a€™ a€™ He insisted that, when the people get an inflation brainstorm, the 
only way to
get it out of their blood is to let it collapse. He held that even a panic was not altogether a bad 
thing. He said: a€~a€~It will purge the rottenness out of the sys- tem. High costs of living and 
high living will come down. People will work harder, live a more moral life. Values will be 
adjusted, and enterprising people will pick up the wrecks from less competent peoplea€™ a€™

Fiscal Policy

Q: Many economists say that fiscal policy does not worka€”that Roosevelta€™ s deficit spending did 
not pull the U.S. out of the Great Depression.

A: They are wrong. Roosevelta€™ s deficit spending did pull the U.S. out of the Great 
Depressiona€”but it did not do so until World War II, which was when the deficit spending really 
took place. The deficits of the New Deal era seemed large and shocking to people at the time, but 
they were small relative to the scale of the whole economy. Peak unemployment in the Great 
Depression hit 23 percent. To reduce that to
5 percent would have required deficits as large as 9 percent of GDP or morea€”which we did not have 
until World War II. Thus it is not surprising that unemployment stayed above 10 percent until the 
eve of World War II.

The NIRA and NLRA as Neutral

Q: Did structural reforms like the NIRA and the NLRA help recovery?

A: I think there is somewhat more than a grain of truth in the claim that much of the New Deal, 
especially its structural interventions in the economy, was ineffec- five and neutrala€”as far as 
its impact on recovery from the Great Depression was concerned. And there is a grain of truth in 
the claim that some of it was counter- productive.

John Maynard Keynes told Roosevelt so in a letter of February 1, 1938. And Keynes went on to argue 
that the reason the U.S. recovery had stalled out in 1937a€“ 1938 was that Roosevelta€™ s policies 
were not Keynesian enougha€”that a€~a€~the present [renewed] slump could have been predicted with 
absolute certaintya€™ a€™ by anybody knowing the year before how Roosevelt was going to try to 
reduce
deficit spending and tighten money. But that the New Deal was not Keynesian enough does not mean 
that we should be even less Keynesian now than we are being. And the argument that Milton Friedman 
and John Maynard Keynes were both wrong when they blamed the renewed 1938 downturn on 
contractionary macroeconomic policiesa€”well that is an argument that Ohanian is a very brave man 
indeed to make.

The NIRA and the NLRA as Harmful

Q: Wasna€™ t the New Deal harmful to recovery because it introduced blockages into labor and 
product markets?

A: I dona€™ t think anyone has argued that the NIRA and the NLRA boosted aggre- gate demand and put 
more people to work. That saida€”output and employment were growing very rapidly in the period when 
the NIRA was in effect, so if it was doing harm it seems likely that other aspects of the New 
Deala€”abandoning the gold standard, giving up the target of achieving immediate budget balance, 
quantitative
easinga€”were doing good. The years during which the NRA was in effect saw the unemployment rate go 
from 22.9 percent down to 14.4 percent.

And Milton Friedman was certain that the recession of 1937a€“38 was not due to the NLRA and to 
greater union power but rather to a bad mistake of monetary policy in raising reserve requirements. 
In early 1937 the Federal Reserve doubled required reserves out of fear of future inflation, and 
the economy fell off a cliff as a result. I dona€™t know anybody who hated strong unions more than 
Milton Friedmana€”
yet he did not blame them for the recession of 1937a€“38.

To step back, the a€~a€~impediments to market competition^™ a€™ that Ohanian blames for the 
persistence of the Great Depression were still around and were stronger than ever in the late 1940s 
and 1950s. If they did not produce high structural unemployment then, what reason is there to think 
that they produced high structural unemployment in the U.S. in the 1930s?

The NIRA: More

Q: What is your view of Roosevelta€™ s signature initiative of his first year in officea€”the 
National Recovery Administration, the National Industrial Recovery Act?

A: I believe that my view of the NRA is the same as John Maynard Keynesa€™ s view: that it was a 
mistake. When I read John Maynard Keynesa€™ s open letter to Franklin Delano Roosevelt of December 
31, 1933,1 can hear Keynes desperately trying not to be impolite while discouraging Roosevelt from 
any further policy moves along the lines of the NRA. Keynes wrote:

I cannot detect any material aid to recovery in NIRA . .. The Act is on the Statute Book; a 
considerable amount has been done towards imple- menting it; but it might be better for the present 
to allow experience to ac- cumulate ... NIRA, which is essentially Reform and probably impedes Re- 
covery, has been put across too hastily, in the false guise of being part of the technique of 
Recovery.

I think the NIRA could have done significant damage to the economy had it not been negated by the 
Supreme Court. As things were, however, I dona€™ t think it had a material effect. Output was too 
depressed and demand too low for the NRA codes to have materially depressed it further during the 
short time it was in operation.


The NLRA: More

Q: Some economists blame slow recovery from the Great Depression in the United States on the NLRA 
and the consequent rise to power of American labor unionsa€” that they pushed up wages, and so 
priced workers out of the labor market.

A: The NLRA came too late to be blamed for the Great Depression. The most you can do is blame it 
for the 1937a€“38 recession. If you are going to blame strong unions for high unemployment in the 
late 1930s, you then have to come up with a reason for why even stronger unions in the 1950s did 
not produce high unemployment. And you have to explain why Milton Friedman disagrees withyoua€”why 
Milton
Friedman does not see union power but rather the contraction of the money stock as the cause of the 
rise of unemployment in 1937a€“38.

Slow Recovery From The Depression

Q: Shouldna€™ t the economy have recovered completely from the Great Depression by 1936? Doesna€™ t 
the fact that the Great Depression continued through the 1930s suggest that the New Deal was 
harmful?
A: The same models that tell Professor Ohanian, starting in 1932, that the Great Depression should 
have been over by 1936 also tell him, if you start them in 1928, that the Great Depression did not 
happen at all.
The pattern across industrial economies is: the later you start your New Deal, the worse you do. 
That is a striking pattern.

Unemployment Lower Before Roosevelt

Q: If the New Deal was such a success why was unemployment lower before Roosevelt, as Professor 
Ohanian says?

A: This is true only for a very peculiar definition of a€~a€~before Roosevelta€™ a€™ a€”a normal 
person would think that a€~a€~before Roosevelta€™ a€™ meant 1932 or perhaps the winter of 
1932a€“33. But Cole and Ohanian mean, instead, an average of 1930a€“1932. Nineteen twenty-nine was 
a boom year of extremely high unemployment. Nineteen-thirty was an average year. 
Nineteen-thirty-one was a bad
year. But it was only after the fi- nancial crises of late 1931, say Milton Friedman and Anna 
Schwartz, that the cratering of the system of financial intermediation and the sudden rise in the 
reserve-deposit and currency-deposit ratios turned the downturn into the Great Depression. To 
compare the New Deal Era to the average of 1930a€“1932 is not just to move the goalposta€”it is to 
pick up the goalposts and run as
fast as you can out of the stadium.

Weekly Hours at the End of the 1930s

Q: Total hours worked per adult in 1939 remained about 21 percent below their 1929 
levela€”doesna€™t that prove that the New Deal was a failure?

A: Cole and Ohanian work very hard to try to convince their readers that things got worse after 
Roosevelt took office. But, as they know well, they didna€™ t: things got bettera€”they just did 
not get enough better to get employment back to normal until the huge burst of federal deficit 
spending that was World War II.
Break their claim into two parts. The first part: unemployment was 22.9 percent in 1932 and down to 
11.3 percent in 1939a€”yes, that tells us that recovery was incomplete.

The second part: hours of work per employed person were 13 percent lower in 1939 than in 1929. Cole 
and Ohanian assume that all of this decline in hours of work per week per employed person is due to 
deficient demand rather than to a much-desired increase in leisure. I dona€™ t think that is right. 
In 1949 hours worked per adult were 18 percent and in 1959,17 percent below their 1929 level. But 
does that mean
that the economy was even more depressed in the 1950s than it was in 1939? No. You dona€™ t want to 
maintain that the interwar decline in hours worked tells us about cycle and not trend. Is there 
anyone who will say that the decline in hours worked from 1914 to 1952 tells us that the economy 
was performing much worse along a business-cycle dimension in 1952 than it was in 1914? No. The 
1914a€“1950 period
saw the last sharp decline in the American workweeka€”a decline that does not mean that the economy 
was depressed and performing poorly in 1959 or 1949 (or 1939) relative to 1914 or 1929, but instead 
that Americans had decided to take a substantial part of their increased technological wealth and 
use it to buy in- creased leisure.

Private Investment

Q: Didna€™t Roosevelta€™ s New Deal Policies destroy business confidence and deepen the Great 
Depression?

A: The most aggressive claim to this effect that I have seen comes from Professor Bryan Caplan of 
George Mason, who wrote that: a€~a€~ [Robert] Mugabe has made people afraid to invest in Zimbabwe. 
Why should [Brad] doubt thata€”on a smaller scale, of coursea€’’Roosevelt made people afraid to 
invest in the U.S.?a€™ a€™
The answer is: no, Franklin Delano Roosevelt bears no resemblance to Robert Mugabe.

And the answer is: no, Franklin Delano Roosevelta€™ s policies did not depress private investment 
by making businessmen more scared to invest in America; when FDR took office, businessmen were 
already totally scared to invest in Americaa€”net investment was well below zero, and could hardly 
drop any further.

Public confidence in markets reached a nadir in 1933, when half the banks in the country had 
closed, when Wall Street was out of business, when the Dow stood at its appalling lows. Before the 
new deal there was no securities industry, no banking industry, no mortgage industry, no capital 
formation or lending of any kind. Forty percent of home mortgages were in default. It was only with 
the passage of New Deal
effortsa€”the SEC, the FDIC, the FSLICa€”that the mechanisms of private cap- ital began to kick 
back into gear. Dona€™t take it from me. Take it from Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, who 
wrote in his essays on the Great Depression that: a€~a€~only with the New Deala€™ s rehabilitation 
of the financial system in 1933a€“35 did the economy begin its slow emergence from the Great
Depression.a€™ a€™

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

ORAL DELIVERED STATEMENT OF J. BRADFORD DELONG, PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA AT 
BERKELEY

Mr. DELONG. Thank you, Chairman Brown, Senator Merkley.

Drawing lessons from the New Deal requires, first, understanding what the New Deal was. Franklin 
Delano Roosevelt took everything that was on the kitchen shelf and threw it into the pot on March 
4,1933, and then began stirring, fishing things out that seemed not to be so tasty and having the 
Supreme Court fish a good deal of it out as well; adding spices, adding new ingredients, all the 
while watching the thing
cook.

Now, the aspect of the New Deal we focus on today is the expan- sionary monetary policy aspect. The 
conventional interest rate re- ductions, the quantitative easing by the Federal Reserve in the late 
1930s, banking sector nationalization and recapitalization, and fiscal policy expansiona€”how 
effective were these?

Well, I think there is a broad, near-consensus that the expansionary macroeconomic policies of the 
New Deal era were effective. Had Senator McCain won the Presidential election last November, the 
first panel here would not have had Christina Romer. She would be back at Berkeley, and I would not 
be having to teach her course this semester. Instead, it would have someone like Douglas 
Holtz-Eakin or Kevin
Hassett or Mark Zandi, one of John McCainaC™ s senior economic advisers, all of whom would be 
arguing that New Deal-like monetary and fiscal stimulus programs were effective as part of arguing 
for the McCain fiscal stimulus program that would in all likelihooda€”or the McCain banking 
recapitalization program that would in all likelihood be proceeding through the Congress.

Now, back at the start of the Great Depression, none of the major industrial powers of the world 
pursued these expansionary macroeconomic policies. They held instead that the government is best 
which governs least as far as interventionist policy is con- cerned, and they bound themselves with 
the goldenfettersof the gold standard. Only when these were brokencould a New Deal begin in any of 
the major industrial
countries, and we know when each of the five major industrial countries of the world back during 
the Depression case off its golden fetters and began its New Deal, we know also how quickly each of 
them recovered from the Great Depression. That is the chart up there on your right.

There is a very strong correlation between how early a country abandoned gold and began its own 
individual New Deal on the one hand and how rapid and complete its recovery was on the other, as 
this chart I have reproduced from Barry Eichengreena€™ s 1992 ar- tide and then scribbled on myself 
shows.Those economies that abandoned the gold standard and started expansionarymonetary and, to a 
lesser extent,
fiscal policies in 1931 did best; those that abandoned the gold standard in 1933 did second best; 
France, which waited until the very end of the 1930s to start its New Deal, did worse.

Statisticians will tell you that if you thought before looking at this chart that it really did not 
matter what a New Deal did, that the pluses and the minuses of New Deal policies largely offset 
each other, that if you thought there was only 50a€“50 chance that New Deals mattered before 
looking at this chart, then after looking at this evidence you would be 95 percent sure that New 
Deals mattered.

Which part of the fiscal and monetary expansion of the New Deals in all the different countries 
mattered? Probably all of them. It is difficult to write down a model of the economy in which some 
tools work and others do not. All four of the aspects operate through boosting spending, either 
through boosting the money stock and hoping the velocity of money will remain unchanged, or through 
boosting the velocity of
money and hoping that the money stock will remain unchanged. And any model of the economy in which 
increases in spending cause not just inflation but also boost employment and output will see that 
all four of these policy tools are likely to be effective.

Which of the four components of macroeconomic policy helped the most in the New Deala€™ s aiding of 
recovery? That is a much more difficult question. Christina Romer, who was here before, places 
enormous stress on the quantitative easing policies of the late 1930s, the mammoth expansions of 
the money supply even after in- terest rates on Treasury securities had already been reduced to ef- 
fectively zero, and
says it played the most major role. Professor Galbraith earlier dissented from that.

Did the fiscal policy expansions help? Well, as Christina Romer said earlier, there were so little 
of them that it was hard to say. The gap between the size of the Great Depression in the United 
States and the magnitude of the extra-direct government spending was so large that it is truly hard 
to see whether fiscal policy might have mattered.
But as Professor Galbraith said, for evidence of the ability of fiscal policy to boost employment 
and production if used on a sufficiently large scale, we have to wait until World War II.

Monetary policy contraction, banking sector collapse, and the transformation of irrational 
exuberance into unwarranted pes- simism carried the U.S. unemployment rate up from 3 percent to 29 
percenta€”or to 23 percent from 1929 to 1932. Monetary expan- sion, banking reform, and small 
deficits then drove the unemploy- ment rate down to 9.5 percent by the start of large-scale 
mobiliza- tion in 1940. And wartime
government expenditures and deficits drove the unemployment rate down to 1.2 percent by 1944.

Thank you.

Senator BROWN. Thank you, Dr. DeLong.

I will sort of go left to right and ask each of you about 5 minutesa€™ a€! Dr. DeLong, would you 
weigh in on the 1929a€“1939,20 percent hours worked for adults, 20 percent lower? Do you think that 
is an accurate indicator ofa€!


Monetary policy contraction, banking sector collapse, and the transformation of irrational 
exuberance into unwarranted pes- simism carried the U.S. unemployment rate up from 3 percent to 29 
percenta€”or to 23 percent from 1929 to 1932. Monetary expan- sion, banking reform, and small 
deficits then drove the unemploy- ment rate down to 9.5 percent by the start of large-scale 
mobiliza- tion in 1940. And wartime
government expenditures and deficits drove the unemployment rate down to 1.2 percent by 1944.

Thank you.

Senator BROWN. Thank you, Dr. DeLong.

I will sort of go left to right and ask each of you about 5 minutesa€™ a€! Dr. DeLong, would you 
weigh in on the 1929a€“1939,20 percent hours worked for adults, 20 percent lower? Do you think that 
is an accurate indicator ofa€!

Mr. DELONG. It is a puzzling question thata€”and it is indeed the case that unemployment declined, 
the unemployment rate declined extremely sharply from 1932 to 1939, from 23 percent down to 11.3 
percent, according to the Weir measure, and practically all of this is indeed an increase in the 
fraction of the labor force that has jobs and very little of it being a discouraged worker effect 
because that discouraged
worker effect is not present, at least I at least cana€™ t see it in David Weira€™ s Labor Force 
series.

But nevertheless, it is certainly true that hours of work per employed person were 13 percent lower 
in 1939 than in 1929, and Lee Ohanian wants to conclude that a substantial chunk of this decline is 
due to deficient demand, that the economy was getting better at sharing the available work hours 
among the workers but was not producing nearly as much demand for labor as we would want to see.

This is debatable. In 1949, hours worked per adult were 18 per- cent. In 1959, they were 17 percent 
below their 1929 level. But do we want to conclude that the economy was even more depressed in the 
1950s than it was in 1939? No. The decline in hours worked tells us a lot about the cycle and the 
trend, that the decline in hours worked from 1914 to 1952 does not mean that the economy was 
performing much worse
in 1952 than it was in 1914.

The Great Depression comes in the middle of the last sharp decline in the American work week we 
have seen, and shows us that Americans back then were deciding collectively to take a substantial 
part of their increased technological wealth and use it to buy increased leisure. And for that 
reason, I am more skeptical of the work hours comparison of 1939 to 1932 and 1929 and I tend to 
think that it makes more sense
to take the unemployment rate as an indicator of how complete recovery is.

Senator BROWN. Interesting answer. Thank you.

What role did the Fed play in reversing the Great Depression? What policies, in particular, should 
it have pursued?

Mr. DELONG. Well, this isa€”I think when you, in fact, talk about the Federal Reserve and the Great 
Depression, there really are three questions. The first is did the Federal Reserve cause the 
Depression? Was the economy going along doing its normal thing and then the Federal Reserve all of 
a sudden decided to do something bad, and as a result we fell into the Great Depression? And I 
think the answer to that is
clearly no, that the Great Depression started for other reasons. The Federal Reserve was simply a 
bystander, that, as Professor Galbraith said earlier, there are signs of substantial natural 
instability, right, in the economy, at least as it stood in the interwar period. Then it starts 
down and it keeps going down.

The second question is, could the Federal Reserve have interrupted the Great Depression? Milton 
Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartza€™ s Monetary History of the United States is a very large and 
very impressive book. I think Professor Galbraith calls it magisterial at some point in his written 
testimony. It argues the Federal Reserve could by itself have stopped the Great Depression in its 
tracks had it done
enough to print up bank reserves, to encourage the Bureau of Engraving and Printing to print up 
currency, had it rescued threatened banks. But the Federal Reserve did not do so.

And this thesis of the Monetary History of the United States has, I think, taken profound damage 
over the last 2 years, for Chairman Bernanke of the Federal Reserve and his team have, via open 
market operations and now quantitative easing, they have done exactly what Friedmana€“Schwartz 
recommended and claimed would have stopped the Great Depression in its tracks. They have expanded 
bank reserves, the
monetary base, and the money supply to an ex- tent I would not have believed possible 3 years ago. 
Yet we all think that this was not enough, that we need banking policy and probably fiscal policy, 
as well, in order to keep the Great Depres- sion currently the last depression that America has 
suffered.

I think this is a substantial intellectual loss for Friedmana€“ Schwartz and an intellectual 
victory for Bernankea€“Keynes, who argued that all the conventional interest rate and quantitative 
easing monetary policy in the world might not be enough if the capitalization of the banking sector 
vanished and the credit channel got itself well and truly clogged, which is where we seem to be.

The third question is what role did the Federal Reserve play in spurring recovery, and here we have 
the debate, and we have seen a piece of it in the debate between Chairman Romer and Professor 
Galbraith earlier, Christina Romer placing a very heavy weight on the quantitative easing policies 
of the Federal Reserve and of the gold inflow during the 1930s, arguing that even after the Federal 
Reserve has done
everything it can to lower interest rates on Treasury securities to zero, if it continues to expand 
the money supply, well, that money burns a hole in peoplea€™ s pockets and they spend it and that 
boosts spending, and Professor Galbraith placing more stress on what fiscal expansion there was and 
on the recovery of the banking system?

Here, well, my office and Professor Galbraitha€™ s office is 1,000 miles away, but in her previous 
life, Christina Romera€™ s office is only 50 steps down the hall and she is very, very impressive 
and very convincing, so I tend to side with Christina on that one.
Senator BROWN. Fair enougha€!. The last word, Dr. DeLong.

Mr. DELONG. I think that the lesson from viewing fiscal anD monetary policy and government attempts 
to use them to serve as balance wheels of the economy since the Great Depression, of the 
abandonment of Herbert Hoover Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellona€™ s dictum that liquidation is 
actually a healthy process, part of what economist Joseph Schumpeter called the natural breathing 
of the economic
organism, that we have abandoned that and we think we have these policy tools and have been trying 
to use them and the question is how effective they are.

And I think the conclusion from 70 years of economists arguing and watching economies and watching 
the success of these tools is that almost all of the time monetary policy is more effective, and 
almost all of the time monetary policy is easier to implement and easier to change when conditions 
change, that it moves faster and it also is more flexible.

But then there come times like today, all right, times when the interest rate on safe short- and 
medium-term Treasury securities has been pushed all the way down to zero and in which you have to 
ask, if you undertake further expansionary monetary policy, well, whose incentives are you 
changing? We are economists. We believe that people respond to incentives, that government policies 
worked by changing the
incentives that people face, but by the time you have pushed interest rates down to zero and cana€™ 
t push them any further, whose incentives are you changing by continuing to rely on monetary 
policy?

And it is in that situation that we are now, and that is when you start dragging out the other 
tools of trying to keep spending in the economy at a normal pace. You know, the quantitative easing 
part of monetary policy, that maybe you can give people so much money it burns a hole in their 
pocket and they spend it, that the aggressive banking sector recapitalizations and government loan 
guarantee programsthat wesee
the Treasury trying to roll out now that have their parallel in operations conducted by the 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation during the Great Depression, which had, if I may say so, an 
easier time. The RFC had powers to bring banks into conservatorship without declaring that they 
were insolvent.

And so to the extent that there is a fear that declaring that banks are, in the view of the 
government, insolvent will cause some kind of crisis of confidence and a shrinkage of the money 
stock as people pull their money out of banks, well, the RFC had tools that would avoid this, and 
perhaps Tim Geithnera€™ s life would be a little bit easier at the Treasury if he had them now.

And last, there is the fiscal policy, that government spending, government tax cuts, with the idea 
that if the private sector is spending and is not staying stable, well, maybe the government can 
add to it and so keep things on an even keel. And I think the prudent thing is, when asked which of 
these should we be doing, is to say yes, all right, that when there is great uncertainty andwhen 
you have a number of toolsfor all
of which there is some rea- son to believe they are at least somewhat effective, we will do what 
Roosevelt did, experimentation. Try them all and reinforce the ones that seem to be working.

8616 words
Leave a comment

Senator BROWN. Thank you, Dr. DeLong.

Thank you all for joining us. This is the first of several hearings that will help Congress shape 
our response and our reaction to this economic crisis. I appreciate all of the service all of you 
have given by being here today and the good work you do, each in your institutions.

The record will be open for 7 days for Senator DeMint and the two other Members of the 
Subcommittee, and if you want to revise your remarks or add anything or respond to any of the 
questions that you didna€™t feel that you got to respond to completely enough, certainly you are 
free to be in touch with the Subcommittee to do that, also.
The Committee is adjourned. Thank you very much. [Whereupon, at 4:34 p.m., the hearing was 
adjourned.]

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)
1

John Maynard Keynes (1938), a€~a€~Private Letter to Franklin Delano Roosevelt of February la€™ a€™ 
<http://tinyurl.com/dl20090325a>
2

John Maynard Keynes (1933), a€~a€~Open Letter to Franklin Delano Roosevelt of December 3 la€™ a€™ 
<http://tinyurl.com/dl20090325b>.
3

Barry J. Eichengreen (1992), a€~a€~The Origins and Nature of the Great Slump Revisited,a€™a€™ 
Economic History Review 45:2 (May), pp. 213a€“39.
4

See Christina D. Romer (1992), a€~a€~What Ended the Great Depression?a€™ a€™ Journal of Economic 
History 52:4 (December, pp. 757a€“784 <http: //ww w.j stor.org/stable/2123226>


Monetary policy contraction, banking sector collapse, and the transformation of irrational 
exuberance into unwarranted pes- simism carried the U.S. unemployment rate up from 3 percent to 29 
percenta€”or to 23 percent from 1929 to 1932. Monetary expan- sion, banking reform, and small 
deficits then drove the unemploy- ment rate down to 9.5 percent by the start of large-scale 
mobiliza- tion in 1940. And wartime
government expenditures and deficits drove the unemployment rate down to 1.2 percent by 1944.

Thank you.

Senator BROWN. Thank you, Dr. DeLong.

I will sort of go left to right and ask each of you about 5 minutesa€™ a€! Dr. DeLong, would you 
weigh in on the 1929a€“1939,20 percent hours worked for adults, 20 percent lower? Do you think that 
is an accurate indicator ofa€!

Mr. DELONG. It is a puzzling question thata€”and it is indeed the case that unemployment declined, 
the unemployment rate declined extremely sharply from 1932 to 1939, from 23 percent down to 11.3 
percent, according to the Weir measure, and practically all of this is indeed an increase in the 
fraction of the labor force that has jobs and very little of it being a discouraged worker effect 
because that discouraged
worker effect is not present, at least I at least cana€™ t see it in David Weira€™ s Labor Force 
series.

But nevertheless, it is certainly true that hours of work per employed person were 13 percent lower 
in 1939 than in 1929, and Lee Ohanian wants to conclude that a substantial chunk of this decline is 
due to deficient demand, that the economy was getting better at sharing the available work hours 
among the workers but was not producing nearly as much demand for labor as we would want to see.

This is debatable. In 1949, hours worked per adult were 18 per- cent. In 1959, they were 17 percent 
below their 1929 level. But do we want to conclude that the economy was even more depressed in the 
1950s than it was in 1939? No. The decline in hours worked tells us a lot about the cycle and the 
trend, that the decline in hours worked from 1914 to 1952 does not mean that the economy was 
performing much worse
in 1952 than it was in 1914.

The Great Depression comes in the middle of the last sharp decline in the American work week we 
have seen, and shows us that Americans back then were deciding collectively to take a substantial 
part of their increased technological wealth and use it to buy increased leisure. And for that 
reason, I am more skeptical of the work hours comparison of 1939 to 1932 and 1929 and I tend to 
think that it makes more sense
to take the unemployment rate as an indicator of how complete recovery is.

Senator BROWN. Interesting answer. Thank you.

What role did the Fed play in reversing the Great Depression? What policies, in particular, should 
it have pursued?

Mr. DELONG. Well, this isa€”I think when you, in fact, talk about the Federal Reserve and the Great 
Depression, there really are three questions. The first is did the Federal Reserve cause the 
Depression? Was the economy going along doing its normal thing and then the Federal Reserve all of 
a sudden decided to do something bad, and as a result we fell into the Great Depression? And I 
think the answer to that is
clearly no, that the Great Depression started for other reasons. The Federal Reserve was simply a 
bystander, that, as Professor Galbraith said earlier, there are signs of substantial natural 
instability, right, in the economy, at least as it stood in the interwar period. Then it starts 
down and it keeps going down.

The second question is, could the Federal Reserve have interrupted the Great Depression? Milton 
Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartza€™ s Monetary History of the United States is a very large and 
very impressive book. I think Professor Galbraith calls it magisterial at some point in his written 
testimony. It argues the Federal Reserve could by itself have stopped the Great Depression in its 
tracks had it done
enough to print up bank reserves, to encourage the Bureau of Engraving and Printing to print up 
currency, had it rescued threatened banks. But the Federal Reserve did not do so.

And this thesis of the Monetary History of the United States has, I think, taken profound damage 
over the last 2 years, for Chairman Bernanke of the Federal Reserve and his team have, via open 
market operations and now quantitative easing, they have done exactly what Friedmana€“Schwartz 
recommended and claimed would have stopped the Great Depression in its tracks. They have expanded 
bank reserves, the
monetary base, and the money supply to an ex- tent I would not have believed possible 3 years ago. 
Yet we all think that this was not enough, that we need banking policy and probably fiscal policy, 
as well, in order to keep the Great Depres- sion currently the last depression that America has 
suffered.

I think this is a substantial intellectual loss for Friedmana€“ Schwartz and an intellectual 
victory for Bernankea€“Keynes, who argued that all the conventional interest rate and quantitative 
easing monetary policy in the world might not be enough if the capitalization of the banking sector 
vanished and the credit channel got itself well and truly clogged, which is where we seem to be.

The third question is what role did the Federal Reserve play in spurring recovery, and here we have 
the debate, and we have seen a piece of it in the debate between Chairman Romer and Professor 
Galbraith earlier, Christina Romer placing a very heavy weight on the quantitative easing policies 
of the Federal Reserve and of the gold inflow during the 1930s, arguing that even after the Federal 
Reserve has done
everything it can to lower interest rates on Treasury securities to zero, if it continues to expand 
the money supply, well, that money burns a hole in peoplea€™ s pockets and they spend it and that 
boosts spending, and Professor Galbraith placing more stress on what fiscal expansion there was and 
on the recovery of the banking system?

Here, well, my office and Professor Galbraitha€™ s office is 1,000 miles away, but in her previous 
life, Christina Romera€™ s office is only 50 steps down the hall and she is very, very impressive 
and very convincing, so I tend to side with Christina on that one.
Senator BROWN. Fair enougha€!. The last word, Dr. DeLong.

Mr. DELONG. I think that the lesson from viewing fiscal anD monetary policy and government attempts 
to use them to serve as balance wheels of the economy since the Great Depression, of the 
abandonment of Herbert Hoover Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellona€™ s dictum that liquidation is 
actually a healthy process, part of what economist Joseph Schumpeter called the natural breathing 
of the economic
organism, that we have abandoned that and we think we have these policy tools and have been trying 
to use them and the question is how effective they are.

And I think the conclusion from 70 years of economists arguing and watching economies and watching 
the success of these tools is that almost all of the time monetary policy is more effective, and 
almost all of the time monetary policy is easier to implement and easier to change when conditions 
change, that it moves faster and it also is more flexible.

But then there come times like today, all right, times when the interest rate on safe short- and 
medium-term Treasury securities has been pushed all the way down to zero and in which you have to 
ask, if you undertake further expansionary monetary policy, well, whose incentives are you 
changing? We are economists. We believe that people respond to incentives, that government policies 
worked by changing the
incentives that people face, but by the time you have pushed interest rates down to zero and cana€™ 
t push them any further, whose incentives are you changing by continuing to rely on monetary 
policy?

And it is in that situation that we are now, and that is when you start dragging out the other 
tools of trying to keep spending in the economy at a normal pace. You know, the quantitative easing 
part of monetary policy, that maybe you can give people so much money it burns a hole in their 
pocket and they spend it, that the aggressive banking sector recapitalizations and government loan 
guarantee programsthat wesee
the Treasury trying to roll out now that have their parallel in operations conducted by the 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation during the Great Depression, which had, if I may say so, an 
easier time. The RFC had powers to bring banks into conservatorship without declaring that they 
were insolvent.

And so to the extent that there is a fear that declaring that banks are, in the view of the 
government, insolvent will cause some kind of crisis of confidence and a shrinkage of the money 
stock as people pull their money out of banks, well, the RFC had tools that would avoid this, and 
perhaps Tim Geithnera€™ s life would be a little bit easier at the Treasury if he had them now.

And last, there is the fiscal policy, that government spending, government tax cuts, with the idea 
that if the private sector is spending and is not staying stable, well, maybe the government can 
add to it and so keep things on an even keel. And I think the prudent thing is, when asked which of 
these should we be doing, is to say yes, all right, that when there is great uncertainty andwhen 
you have a number of toolsfor all
of which there is some rea- son to believe they are at least somewhat effective, we will do what 
Roosevelt did, experimentation. Try them all and reinforce the ones that seem to be working.

8616 words
Leave a comment

Senator BROWN. Thank you, Dr. DeLong.

Thank you all for joining us. This is the first of several hearings that will help Congress shape 
our response and our reaction to this economic crisis. I appreciate all of the service all of you 
have given by being here today and the good work you do, each in your institutions.

The record will be open for 7 days for Senator DeMint and the two other Members of the 
Subcommittee, and if you want to revise your remarks or add anything or respond to any of the 
questions that you didna€™t feel that you got to respond to completely enough, certainly you are 
free to be in touch with the Subcommittee to do that, also.
The Committee is adjourned. Thank you very much. [Whereupon, at 4:34 p.m., the hearing was 
adjourned.]

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)
1

John Maynard Keynes (1938), a€~a€~Private Letter to Franklin Delano Roosevelt of February la€™ a€™ 
<http://tinyurl.com/dl20090325a>
2

John Maynard Keynes (1933), a€~a€~Open Letter to Franklin Delano Roosevelt of December 3 la€™ a€™ 
<http://tinyurl.com/dl20090325b>.
3

Barry J. Eichengreen (1992), a€~a€~The Origins and Nature of the Great Slump Revisited,a€™a€™ 
Economic History Review 45:2 (May), pp. 213a€“39.
4

See Christina D. Romer (1992), a€~a€~What Ended the Great Depression?a€™ a€™ Journal of Economic 
History 52:4 (December, pp. 757a€“784 <http: //ww w.j stor.org/stable/2123226>


Mr. DELONG. I think that the lesson from viewing fiscal anD monetary policy and government attempts 
to use them to serve as balance wheels of the economy since the Great Depression, of the 
abandonment of Herbert Hoover Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellona€™ s dictum that liquidation is 
actually a healthy process, part of what economist Joseph Schumpeter called the natural breathing 
of the economic
organism, that we have abandoned that and we think we have these policy tools and have been trying 
to use them and the question is how effective they are.

And I think the conclusion from 70 years of economists arguing and watching economies and watching 
the success of these tools is that almost all of the time monetary policy is more effective, and 
almost all of the time monetary policy is easier to implement and easier to change when conditions 
change, that it moves faster and it also is more flexible.

But then there come times like today, all right, times when the interest rate on safe short- and 
medium-term Treasury securities has been pushed all the way down to zero and in which you have to 
ask, if you undertake further expansionary monetary policy, well, whose incentives are you 
changing? We are economists. We believe that people respond to incentives, that government policies 
worked by changing the
incentives that people face, but by the time you have pushed interest rates down to zero and cana€™ 
t push them any further, whose incentives are you changing by continuing to rely on monetary 
policy?

And it is in that situation that we are now, and that is when you start dragging out the other 
tools of trying to keep spending in the economy at a normal pace. You know, the quantitative easing 
part of monetary policy, that maybe you can give people so much money it burns a hole in their 
pocket and they spend it, that the aggressive banking sector recapitalizations and government loan 
guarantee programsthat wesee
the Treasury trying to roll out now that have their parallel in operations conducted by the 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation during the Great Depression, which had, if I may say so, an 
easier time. The RFC had powers to bring banks into conservatorship without declaring that they 
were insolvent.

And so to the extent that there is a fear that declaring that banks are, in the view of the 
government, insolvent will cause some kind of crisis of confidence and a shrinkage of the money 
stock as people pull their money out of banks, well, the RFC had tools that would avoid this, and 
perhaps Tim GeithneraC™ s life would be a little bit easier at the Treasury if he had them now.

And last, there is the fiscal policy, that government spending, government tax cuts, with the idea 
that if the private sector is spending and is not staying stable, well, maybe the government can 
add to it and so keep things on an even keel. And I think the prudent thing is, when asked which of 
these should we be doing, is to say yes, all right, that when there is great uncertainty and when 
you have a number of toolsfor all
of which there is some rea- son to believe they are at least somewhat effective, we will do what 
Roosevelt did, experimentation. Try them all and reinforce the ones that seem to be working.

8616 words
Leave a comment

Senator BROWN. Thank you, Dr. DeLong.

Thank you all for joining us. This is the first of several hearings that will help Congress shape 
our response and our reaction to this economic crisis. I appreciate all of the service all of you 
have given by being here today and the good work you do, each in your institutions.

The record will be open for 7 days for Senator DeMint and the two other Members of the 
Subcommittee, and if you want to revise your remarks or add anything or respond to any of the 
questions that you didna€™t feel that you got to respond to completely enough, certainly you are 
free to be in touch with the Subcommittee to do that, also.
The Committee is adjourned. Thank you very much. [Whereupon, at 4:34 p.m., the hearing was 
adjourned.]

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)
1

John Maynard Keynes (1938), a€~a€~Private Letter to Franklin Delano Roosevelt of February la€™ a€™ 
<http://tinyurl.com/dl20090325a>
2

John Maynard Keynes (1933), a€~a€~Open Letter to Franklin Delano Roosevelt of December 3 la€™ a€™ 
<http://tinyurl.com/dl20090325b>.
3

Barry J. Eichengreen (1992), a€~a€~The Origins and Nature of the Great Slump Revisited ,a€™a€™ 
Economic History Review 45:2 (May), pp. 213a€“39.
4

See Christina D. Romer (1992), a€~a€~What Ended the Great Depression?a€™ a€™ Journal of Economic 
History 52:4 (December, pp. 757a€“784 <http://www.jstor.Org/stable/2123226>

