Subscribe now

PREORDER "Slouching Towards Utopia"


PREORDER

<https://bit.lv/3pP3Krk>

Slouching Towards Utopia, forthcoming from Basic Books on September 6.1st sentence: What I call the 
a€oelong twentieth centurya€D started with the watershed-boundary crossing events of around 
1870a€”the triple emergence of globalization, the industrial research lab, and the... 1/
2:05 PM r™ Nov 25,2021


What I call the a€oelong twentieth centurya€D started with the watershed-boundary crossing events 
of around 1870a€”the triple emergence of globalization, the industrial research lab, and the modern 
corporation^’’which ushered in changes that began to pull the world out of the dire poverty that 
had been humanitya€™ s lot for the previous ten thousand years. What I call the a€oelong twentieth 
centurya€D ended in 2010, with the
worlda€™ s leading economic edge, the countries of the North Atlantic, still reeling from the Great 
Recession that had begun in 2008, and thereafter unable to resume economic growth at anything near 
the average pace that had been the rule since 1870. The years following 2010 were to bring large 
system-destabilizing waves of political and cultural anger from masses of citizens, all upset in 
different ways and for different reasons at the
failure                                                                                             
                                                                                                    
     of the system of the twentieth century to work for them as they thought that it should.

In between 1870 and 2010, things were marvelous and terrible, but by the standards of all of the 
rest of human history much more marvelous than terrible.

There we have my first claim about the history of the long 20th century: that, both compared to all 
past centuries and on an absolute scale, the history of the long 20th century was indeed, as Eric 
Hobsbawm says, the history of an Age of Extremes^'bwt those extremes were much much much more 
marvelous than terrible. The arc of long 20th-century history was, by and large and broadly, with 
many hesitations, backward slippages, and complications, toward not
justice but at least toward hope, hope for someday a truly human world.

The one-hundred and forty years 1870-2010 of the long twentieth century were, I strongly believe, 
the most consequential years of all humanitya€™ s centuries.

Here is my second claim: that the long 20th century was the most consequential century in 
humanitya€™ s history, ever. Why? Because back in 1870 humanity was still desperately poor. Now 
some of us are very richa€”the upper-middle classes of the global north are rich beyond the most 
fabulous dreams of luxury dreamed by previous ages. And most of us are, by the standards of all 
previous centuries, very comfortable and long-lived indeed. And that all of us
are not so is a great scandal.

And it was the first century in which the most important historical thread was what anyone would 
call the economic one, for it was the century that saw us end our near-universal dire material 
poverty.

Here is my third claim: That in the long 20th century, for the very first time in human history, 
the principal axis of history was economica€’’rather than cultural, ideological, religious, 
political, military-imperial, or what have you. Why was the long 20th century the first such 
century in which history was predominantly economic? Because before 1870 the economy was changing 
only slowly, too slowly for people's Eves at the end of a century to be that materially
different from how they had been at the beginning. So the economy was thus the painted-scene 
backdrop behind the stage, rather than the action on the stage. (Now do note that you can still say 
that the principal axis of any millennium's history is economic, for over millennia things do 
change.)

But back up: what I have said here simply establishes that the principal axis of the history of the 
long 20th century could have been economica€”that the economy was changing and that enough economic 
damn things were happening one after the other to make it a player in history. But was it a lead 
actor? One of the major themes of my book is going to be:Yes, it   was    the leadactor.

My strong belief that history should focus on the long twentieth century stands in contrast to what 
othersa€”most notably the Marxist British historian Eric Hobsbawma€”have focused on and called the 
a€~short twentieth centurya€™, which lasted from the start of World War I in 1914 to the fall of 
the Soviet Union in 1991.

This is a minor digression: My Grand Narrative of the 20th century is not the only Grand Narrative 
one could construct. We have to have some Grand Narrative, some single most-important plot 
threada€”if we don't, we almost cannot think at all, for we really have almost no way to think 
other than in narrative. I think mine is the most important. But others disagree. And it is 
important never to forget that every Grand Narrative allows and enables you to see some
thingsa€’’hopefully the most important things to youa€”very clearly indeed, but blocks your vision 
of other things.

Such others tend to see the nineteenth century as the long rise of democracy and capitalism, from 
1776 to 1914, and the short twentieth century as one in which really-existing socialism and fascism 
shake the world.

In fact, I believe that, in the western academy, the predominant major Grand Narrative, at least 
implicitly, of the 20th century is that it was really-existing socialism vs. fascism, and 
really-existing socialism knocking itself out in the process of winning its victory, leaving 
consumer capitalisma€”a€oethat old bitch gone in the teetha€D, as the other great post-WWII British 
Marxist historian E.P. Thompson calls it chttps://marxists.org/archive/thompson-
ep/1973/kolakowski,htma€!>, as the unworthy victor in the struggle over systems of 
political-economic organization.

Needless to say, I do not take this view.

I see the three-part mid-century struggle between the systems as, not a sideshow, but as something 
taking place outside of the center ring.

Histories of centuries, long or short, are by definition grand narrative histories, built to tell 
the authora€™ s desired story.

You cannot write a history of an entire century without committing yourself to some Grand 
Narrativea€’’without a spearpoint you cannot conduct a successful hunt, and without a central 
thread for them to follow, humans, who think in narratives, cannot grasp and remember your story. 
Thus the necessity of the spearpoint. It will be imperfect and "false". But it is necessary and 
essential. You have to hold both the necessity and the imperfectness in your mind
simultaneously, always, as you read and think. The map is not the territory. The map, however, is 
the map. Your history will then stand or fall based on how well you back that narrative.

Setting these years, 1914a€“1991, apart as a century makes it easy for Hobsbawm to tell the story 
he wants to tell.

Hobsbawma€™ s choice of period was calculated to provide heavy weight for the spearshaft behind the 
spearpoint of the particular Grand Narrative he wished to tell. Indeed, if you start and end on 
Hobsbawma€™ s datesa€”1917 and 1990a€”it is very hard not to wind up telling some version of his 
story. It may well not have the valence he gives it: of World Communism as the tragic and doomed 
hero of the century, defeating fascism but being so poisoned by
the circumstances of its development and struggle that it then expires after a long decline, 
leaving its unworthy rival consumer capitalism in control, and thus closing off humanity's road to 
utopia. The 1917-1990 short 20th century can be told with Frank Fukuyama's "end of history" valence 
instead. But, as I said, while that is certainly a story, I do not think it is THE story that 
people 500 or 1000 years from now will .think is important and tell when they tell the
story of the years on both sides of 1950.

But it does so at the price of missing much of what I strongly believe is the bigger, more 
important story.

I really dona€™t think either really-existing socialism or fascism is, in the long run of human 
destiny, worthy of being a protagonist (or an antagonist) in big-think broad-sweep history. I mean: 
really-existing socialism was a dead end, a false path, a horrible warning in terms of 
political-economic systems. And as for fascism... well.  if it turns out that future historians 
want to tell political history not as a whig progressive but rather as an Aristotelian alternation-

and-decay-and-replacement-of-rA©gimes story, then fascism will have its place as a form of tyranny 
in the age of mass and social media, much as Thoukidides discusses the role of Peisistratos and his 
supposed championing of the cause of the hyperakrioia€.,,with the exception that Peisistratos did 
actually have policies to boost the prosperity of the hyperakrioi, and did make Athens great again. 
But if we do better than Aristotelian alternation in political
rA©gimes in the long run, fascism and its cousins will also be seen as dead ends, horrible 
warnings, stories that we tell to remind us how horrible people can be to one another, rather than 
the protagonist of some Grand Narrative principal thread of human history.

The bigger, more important story is the one that runs from about 1870 to 2010, from humanitya€™ s 
circa-1870 success in unlocking the gate that had kept it in dire poverty, up to its circa-2010 
failure to maintain the pace of the rapid upward trajectory in human wealth that the earlier 
success had set in motion.

I think that is the worthy story of the history of the 20th century has as its protagonist neither 
really-existing socialism, nor really the a€oefree worlda€D that triumphed over the 
totalitarianisms. I think that the worthy story is, rather, humanitya€™ s escape from Malthusian 
povertya€”and from societies in which the class of people with leisure to think deeply and 
nutrition to think about something other .than how hungry they are is small, and is composed of
those who have figured out how to unproductively take an outsized share by force and fraud. This 
escape from the realm of material necessity into the realm of freedom, choice, and options is, I 
think, the proper storya€”and the big story. And its proper protagonist is humanity.

What follows is my grand narrative, my version of what is the most important story to tell of the 
history of the twentieth century. It is a primarily economic story.

Now I start to say exactly what my Grand Narrative thread that I will use to organize the history 
of 1870-2010 is.

It naturally starts in 1870.

A short reminder to readers of the start date.

I believe it naturally stops in 2010.

A short sentence to remind readers of the end date.

As the genius Dr. Jekyll-like Austro-English-Chicagoan moral philosopher Friedrich August von Hayek 
observed, the market economy crowdsourcesa€’’incentivizes and coordinates at 
thegrassrootsa€’’solutions to the problems it setsa€!

Introducing two supporting characters: the market economy with its extraordinary power to 
grassroots-crowdsource powerful solutions to the problems it is set, and its principal 20th century 
theoretician, the good Dr. Jekyll-side of Prof. Dr. Friedrich August von Hayek.

Back before 1870 humanity, given its population, did not have the technologies or the organizations 
to allow a marketeconomy to pose the problem of how to make humanity rich.

However, back before 1870 humanity did not have the technologiesa€’’either the technologies of 
manipulating nature or the technologies of organizing humansa€”in either the level amount or the 
rate of growth for the market economy to be set the problem of moving humanity out of the realm of 
necessity in which it was trapped, the realm of dire Malthusian poverty.

So even though humanity had had market economies, or at least market sectors within its economies, 
for thousands of years before 1870, all that markets could do was to find customers for producers 
of luxuries and conveniences, and make the lives of the rich luxurious and of the middle class 
convenient and comfortable.

Hence before 1870 market sectors, and market economies, had merely turned their crowd-sourcing 
energies to making luxurious for the rich and conveniences to make the (small) middle-class 
comfortable. (Remember! The a€cemiddle classa€D is not the median 50th percentile! The a€oemiddle 
classa€D are, in previous centuries, those who are not rich but who do not fear starvation should 
the Wheel of Fortune take even a minor adverse turn!)
Things changed starting around 1870.

Another short sentence for the sake of rhetoric, attempting to hammer into readers the idea that 
1870 and its triplea€”the coming of globalization, of the industrial research lab, and the modern 
corporation^”in a strong and powerful sense marked the end of all previous human history.

Then [in 1870] we got the institutions for organization and research and the technologiesa€”we got 
full globalization, the industrial research laboratory, and the modern corporation.

The coming of all three of these more or less at once was a truly mighty change. It rationalized 
and routinized the discovery and development and the development and deployment and not just the 
local but the global deployment of technological advances. The coming of all these three more than 
quadrupled the pace at which humanitya€™ s technological empire was increasing. And that step-up in 
the growth rate lasted from 1870 to 2010.

Were those three changes baked in the cake by what had come before? Are they best thought of as 
slow, evolutionary advances that one would naturally have expected to follow from the course of the 
Industrial Revolution up to 1870? Alfred D. Chandler says: probably not. His "Scale and Scope" 
makes powerful arguments that the creativity that produced the modern corporation, and the 
industrial research labs that served it, were results of the particular historical
situation and of accidents that happened in the U.S. after the Civil War, After all, no similar 
developments took place in France or Britain.

I tend to see industry-oriented universal banks as a key intermediary: those emerged in the U.S. 
and in Germany, so it was not a unique event. But they did not emerge elsewhere. So it was a rare 
event. This, however, carries me far away from my main thread.

These were the keys.

Again: a very short sentence to rhetorically hammer home the point that this 1870 triple of the 
industrial research lab, the modern corporation, and full (not just fledgling) globalization was 
really really important.


These unlocked the gate that had previously kept humanity in dire poverty.

Another short sentence, driving home the point. Without this triple of industrial research lab, 
modern corporation, and full globalization, we might well have been doomed. We might well have been 
doomed by slow productivity growth, by our fecundity, and by the patriarchy that made becoming the 
mother of at least one son who survived to adulthood nearly the.only source of significant social 
power for female members of homo sapiens sapiensa€”to

Malthusian or near-Malthusian poverty.

(Parenthetically, many would dismiss my focus on 1870 and the industrial research lab, modern 
corporation, full globalization triple. They would say that the emergence of something like our 
modern world was close to baked in the cake once we had steampower and textile machinery. But is 
that really true? The First Industrial Revolution depends on really really cheap coal, and by 1870 
the really, really cheap coal was near its end. Worldwide, the pace of global
technological progress deployed was only some 0.45%/year on average from 1770-1870, less than 1/4 
of what it was going to be from 1870-2010. If that pace had slowed to 0.3%/year (or even stayed 
..at 0.45%/year), population growth of 0.6%/year (or 0.9%/year) would have induced sufficient 
resource scarcity to counterbalance technology's boost to living standards, and leave the bulk of 
humanity still under near-Malthusian conditions. Without the triple, I
think,    we might well today have a world in which the rough technology level would be roughly 
that of 1895 with 5 billion people on the globe: a steampunk world indeed.)

These unlocked the gate that had previously kept humanity in dire povertya€!

Without this triple, we had been doomeda€”by slow productivity growth, by our fecundity, and by the 
patriarchy that made becoming the mother of at least one son who survived to adulthood nearly the 
only source of significant social power for female members of homo sapiens sapiensa€”to Malthusian 
or near-Malthusian poverty. With this triple, and with the more-than-quadrupling of the pace of 
proportional growth of humanity's deployed technological
prowess that it drove, we had the possibility of escape, into a realm where we could for the first 
time build a truly human world.

The problem of making humanity rich could now be posed to the market economy, because it now had a 
solution.

The extraordinary more-than-quadrupling of the pace of human .technological progress deployed into 
the world economy allowed the market to turn its energies to doing more than making the lives of 
the rich luxurious and providing conveniences for the middle class.

On the other side of the gate, the trail to utopia came into view.

It was Malthusian poverty that had kept humanity from building its utopia or utopias before 1870. 
But with the coming of the rapid 2% per year technological progress of modern economic growth, that 
blockage to sprinting or running or marching humanity to utopia was removed. With the deployed 
technological prowess in manipulating nature and organizing humans doubling every 35 years starting 
in 1870, humanity's problem was merely to decide,
deliberately, consensually, and thoughtfully, which utopia or utopias we should build for our 
descendants, right? right?

And everything else good should have followed from that.

Over the long 20th century humanity really should have used our collective technological prowess to 
build a Utopia or Utopiasa€“have created, as my friend Max Singer used to say, a truly human world. 
Spoiler: it did not do so. But why not? And is there anything we can do to do better in the 21st 
century? And, if so, what?

Much good did follow from that.

Another short sentence to drive home the idea that while the long 20th century was both marvelous 
and terrible, it was more marvelous than terrible. Indeed, it was the fact that so much of it was 
so marvelous that makes it so disappointing that we have not progressed further on the road to 
utopia, to a truly human world.

My estimatea€”or perhaps my very crude personal guessa€”of the average worldwide pace of what is at 
the core of humanitya€™ s economic growth, the proportional rate of growth of my index of the value 
of the stock of useful ideas about manipulating nature and organizing humans that were discovered, 
developed, and deployed into the world economy, shot up from about 0.45 percent per year before 
1870 to 2.1 percent per year
afterward, truly a watershed-boundary crossing difference.

If there is one single nugget of insight that I want readers of my book to permanently engrave on 
their brains, this is it: around 1870 the rate of technological progress and thus of potential 
wealth creation went into much higher gear. After 1870, humanity's deployed technological 
capabilities and thus potential prosperity doubled every thirty-five yearsa€”and with it came 
economic creative destruction that reduced old economic structures to rubble and built new
ones, and .did it again, and again, and again, every single generation. Before 1870? From 1770-1870 
humanity's globally-deployed technological prowess had a doubling time of about 150 yearsa€”not 35. 
From 1500-1770 it had a doubling time of 500 years. And before 1500, we are looking at a doubling 
time of 2000 years. The difference between our world, in which technological progress creatively 
destroys and revolutionizes the economy every 35 years, and
the world of Agrarian-Age antiquity in which the same proportional changes in technology and 
economy, and thus in polity and society, take not 35 but 2000 years is, I think, a master force 
shaping human history.

A 2.1 percent average growth for the 140 years from 1870 to 2010 is a multiplication by a factor of 
21.5.

Just a very short sentence to hammer home the obvious to those who don't have exponential growth 
magnitudes in their immediate intellectual panoply: a more than tenfold amplification of human 
technological prowess in 140 years is a REALLY BIG F—ING DEAL. To get an equivalent proportional 
jump in the other direction, you have to go back from 1870 to the Bronze Agea€” to the year -2000 
or so. We are, proportionately, as separate in technology from
the railroad's Golden Spike and the first transoceanic cables as those were from the earliest 
chariots and the sculptor of the dancing girl of Mohenjo-Daro:

That [the 21.5-fold multiplication of human deployed technological prowess over 1870 to 2010] was 
very good: the growing power to produce and create wealth and earn an income allowed humans to have 
more of the good things, the necessities, conveniences, and luxuries of life, and to better provide 
for themselves and their families.

Briefly and very very roughly, what twenty workers were needed to do in 1870 with their eyes, 
fingers, thighs, brains, mouths, and ears, 1 worker was able to do in 2010. (And what one worker 
could do in 1870 required 20 in -6000; but the overwhelming bulk of the of the potential benefits 
for humansfrom that twentyfold -6000 to 1870 upward creep of technological knowledge had been eaten 
up by growing resource scarcity: the land and other natural resources
available to support 1 person in -6000 had to support 200 by 1870.) But the twentyfold post-1870 
technological-progress wave had to deal not with a 200- but only a 6-fold multiplication of human 
numbers, leaving lots to be devoted to bringing about much higher average productivity.


±iiid uwd iivt iiivan mat iiuiiianiLj HI            wad    LIIIIVO ad nvn 111 iiiaiviiai-wuuaiv 
LVIIHO ad it navi uwii 111 10/v. LIIVIV wviv diA miiud ad inanj pwpiv 111 z-v±v ad uiviv wviv 111 
±o aiivx LIIV ivaulting invivaov in ivavuiw avaivitj wuaiu LCUVV awaj nvin Human living dianuaiud 
aim iauvi“pivuuuuVILJ ivvvid.

The unprecedented multiplication of human technological prowess and thus potential productivity 
over 1870-2010 was accompanied by unprecedented growth in population as well: the population 
explosion, now near its end with the near-completion of the demographic transition. Some of the 
21-fold amplification of technology had to go to compensate for the six-fold multiplication of 
human population, from 1.3 to 7.6 billion, over 1870-2010. With much less
land available to grow food for your typical person and other forms of resource scarcity, average 
growth in productivity and living standards could not keep pace with technology. But technology did 
definitively win the race with population: the Malthusian Devil that had kept humanity poor for 
millennia was trapped inside the confining pentagram.

As a rough guess, average world income per capita in 2010 would be 8.8 times what it was in 1870, 
meaning an average income per capita in 2010 of perhaps $11,000 per year (to get the figure of 8.8, 
you divide 21.5 by the square-root of 6; or, rather, we multiplied 8.8 by the square-root of 6).

Let me hasten to remind you that these are extremely rough guesses that only a foolhardy idiot 
would commit himself to. Only a foolhardy idiot would dare assert that productivity in living 
standards in the world of 2010 were 8.8 times what they had been in 1870. Such a number requires 
adding and then dividing things that really cannot properly be added and divided in any sense. The 
guess that world population in 20210 was six-fold higher than it had been in
1870 is at least a guess that we can more-or-less justify. But the further stepsa€”that there is a 
one-dimensional thing we can call "technology discovered, invented, developed, deployed, and 
diffused" and that if we normalize it to our income measure the right way to compensate for 
population growth and according resource scarcity is to take a square-root? Ha ha hah ha ha ha ha 
ha ha ha!

Keynes warned: "The fact that two incommensurable collections of miscellaneous objects cannot in 
themselves provide the material for a quantitative analysis need not, of course, prevent us from 
making approximate statistical comparisons, depending on some broad element of judgment rather than 
of strict calculation, which may possess significance and validity within certain limits. But the 
proper place for such things as net real output and the general level of
prices lies within the field of historical and statistical description, and their purpose should be 
to satisfy historical or social curiosity, a purpose for which perfect precisiona€”such as our 
causal analysis requires, whether or not our knowledge of the actual values of the relevant 
quantities is complete or exacta€”is neither usual nor necessary. To say that net output to-day is 
greater, but the price-level lower, than ten years ago or one year ago, is a proposition of a
similar character to the statement that Queen Victoria was a better queen but not a happier woman 
than Queen Elizabetha€”a proposition not without meaning and not without interest, but unsuitable 
as material for the differential calculus. Our precision will be a mock precision if we try to use 
such partly vague and non-quantitative concepts as the basis of a quantitative analysis..."

Keynes was right. I know he was right. I do it anyway.

Hold these figures in your head as a very rough guide to the amount by which humanity was richer in 
2010 than it was in 1870a€”and never forget that the riches were vastly more unequally distributed 
around the globe in 2010 than they were in 1870.

That last is a puzzle: communications and transportation around the entire globe was SO much easier 
in 2010 than it has been in 1870. So why then was the world a more unequal place, looking across 
countries, in 2010 than it had been in 1870? Nay, not just a more unequal place, but a grossly and 
extraordinarily more unequal place.

A 2.1 percent per year growth rate is a doubling every 33 years.

Trying to remind the non-quantitative just what consistent 2.1%/year growth is: doubling in 33 
years, multiplying eight-fold in a century, multiplying 64-fold in two centuries. That is the pace 
of underlying technology growth the world experienced over 1870-2010.

That [the 2.1 percent per year average annual technology growth rate starting in 1870] meant that 
the technological and productivity economic underpinnings of human society in 1903 were profoundly 
different from those of 1870a€”underpinnings of industry and globalization as opposed to ones that 
were still agrarian and landlord-dominated. The mass-production underpinnings of 1936, at least in 
the industrial core of the global north,
were profoundly different also. But the change to the mass consumption-suburbanization 
underpinnings of 1969 was as profound, and that was followed by the shift to the information-age 
microelectronic-based underpinnings of 2002. A revolutionized economy every generation cannot but 
revolutionize society and politics, and a government trying to cope with such repeated revolutions 
cannot help but be greatly stressed in its attempts to
manage and provide for its people in the storms.

Let me stress this: humanity had never before seen anything like this pace of economic 
transformation. Not just production, but newly-transformed production and the further 
transformation of production became the principal work-life business of humanity. As much economic 
change and creative destruction as had taken place over 1720-1870 took place every 33 years after 
1870. And the pace of change over 1720-1870 had already been more than fast enough to
shake societies and polities to pieces. "All that is solid melts into air", Marx and Engels had 
written in 1848: all established hierarchies and orders are steamed away. And they had no real idea 
what was coming: the pace of worldwide change of their day was less than 1/4 of what it would 
become after 1870.

Much good, but much ill also flowed [from the creative-destruction well-nigh complete 
revolutionizing of the economy every generation post-1870]: people can and do use 
technologiesa€”both the harder ones, for manipulating nature, and the softer ones, for organizing 
humansa€”to exploit, to dominate, and to tyrannize. And the long twentieth century saw the worst 
and most bloodthirsty tyrannies that we know of.

More of a proportional increase in humanity's deployed technological prowess every 23 years after 
1870 than was seen in the entire 1770-1870 Industrial Revolution century. (And more than in the 
entire 1500-1770 Imperial-Commercial Revolution Age. And more than over all of 800-1500.) These 
repeated generation-after-generation technological shifts upended and revolutionized economies. The 
associated repeated creative destruction upended societies as
well. This posed two problems for governments: How were they to deal with the "destructive" part of 
creative destruction as it upended the lives of their people? And how were they to deal with 
neighboring governments that decided to use enhanced technological powers for evil for destruction 
and oppression? At the sharp end, a government gone horribly wrong was a genocide-scale problem for 
the people under its boot, and for the people who were that
government's neighbors. The 20th century saw the worst tyrannies ever.

All that was solid melted into aira€”or rather, all established orders and patterns were steamed 
away. Only a small proportion of economic life could be carried out, and was carried out, in 2010 
the same way it had been in 1870. And even the portion that was the same was different; even if you 
were doing the same tasks that your predecessors had done back in 1870, and doing them in the same 
places, others would pay much less of the
worth of their labor-time for what you did or made. As nearly everything economic was transformed 
and transformed againa€”as the economy was revolutionized in every generation, at least in those 
places on the earth that were lucky enough to be the growth polesa€”those changes shaped and 
transformed nearly everything sociological, political, and cultural.

The wave of technological progress at an unprecedented pacea€”one that puts even the 1770-1870 
Industrial Revolution Century to shame, and that packs as much into one year as we saw in 50 
pre-1500 yearsa€”and the associated creative-destruction wealth-generating process of repeated 
revolutionizing and transformation of the economy is THE central underlying process of 20th-century 
history.
All else has to adapt, or fail to adapt, to that. And all else dida€”or failed to do so. That is 
why the history of the 20th century took the form that it did.

PREORDER! <https://bit.lv/3pP3Krk>


Suppose we could go back in time to 1870, and tell people then how rich, relative to them, humanity 
would become by 2010. How would they have reacted?

Remember: as much proportional increase in technological prowess over 1870 to 2010 as was seen over 
-4000 to 1870. And essentially all the potential benefits over the earlier period were eaten up by 
population growth and the relative resource scarcity that it generated. Nearly 6000 years of 
historical progress crammed into a century. Whatwould our predecessors back in 1870have rationally 
thought would be the result?

They would almost surely have thought thatthe world of today would be a paradise, a utopia. People 
would have 8.8 times the wealth? Surely that would mean enough power to manipulatenature and 
organize humans that all but the most trivial of problems and obstacles hobbling humanity could be 
resolved.

People in1870, after all, thought that humanity had outgrown fighting over God. They foughta€”in 
one way or another and for one reason or anothera€”over resources. They would have thought that in 
the world of 2010, with 20x the technological resources of 1870, jostling and fighting to get even 
more resources would have a much lower   priority relative toturning yourskill and energy todoing 
what you ultimately wanted to do with those resources. Consider
Lenin's "State and Revolution": In a capitalist .future society of material abundance, scarcity 
must be artificially and brutally created:

The state in the proper sense of the word, that is, a special machine for the suppression of one 
class by another, and, what is more, of the majority by the minority. Naturally, to be successful, 
such an undertaking as the systematic suppression of the exploited majority by the exploiting 
minority calls for the utmost ferocity and savagery in the matter of suppressing, it calls for seas 
of blood, through which mankind is actually wading its way
in slavery, serfdom and wage labor....

During the transition from capitalism to communism suppression is still necessary, but it is now 
the suppression of the exploiting minority by the exploited majority.  It is no longer a state in 
the proper sense of the word; for the suppression of the minority of exploiters by the majority of 
the wage slaves of yesterday is comparatively so easy, simple and natural a task that it will 
entail far less bloodshed than the suppression of the risings of

slaves, serfs or wage-laborers....

And it is compatible with the extension of democracy to such an overwhelming majority of the 
population that the need for a special machine of suppression will begin to disappear.... The 
exploiters are unable to suppress the people without a highly complex machine... but the people can 
suppress the exploiters even with a very simple a€oemachinea€D....

Communism makes the state absolutely unnecessary, for there is nobody to be 
suppresseda€”a€cenobodya€D in the sense of a class.... We are not Utopians, and do not in the least 
deny the possibility and inevitability of excesses on the part of individual persons, or the need 
to stop such excesses.... [But] this will be done... as simply and as readily as any crowd of 
civilized people. interferes to put a stop to a scuffle or to prevent a woman

from being assaulted.... We know that the fundamental social cause of excesses. [of] violations] of 
the rules of social intercourse, is the exploitation of the people, their want and their poverty. 
With the removal of this chief cause, excesses will inevitably begin to "wither away". We do not 
know how quickly and in what succession, but we do know they will wither away. With their withering 
away the state will also wither away.

Compare to Robert A. Heinlein's libertarian utopia of "The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress", in which the 
ungoverned convicts" of the Lunar ice-mining settlement deal with crimes by grabbing somebody to 
serve as a judge, having him hear the case, and then putting the guilty party out of the airlock 
into the vacuum.
The answer to the questions: Where moon? Where Lambo? Where Utopia? was:

Not here. By 2010 it had been 150 years [of doubling technological prowess every generation]. We 
did not run to the traila€™ s end and reach utopia. We are [at best] still on the tr ail a€’’maybe, 
for we can no longer see clearly to the end of the trail, or even the direction the trail we are on 
is leading us in.

Let me ask you to note how remarkable this disappointment is. All previous this-world 
utopiasa€”starting from Thomasso Campanella's 1602 La cittA del Sole 
chttps://archive.org/details/thecityofthesun02816guta€!> or Francis Bacon's New Atlantis 
<https://archive.org/details/fnewatlantis00bacoa€!> on up through Lenin's State and Revolution 
>https://marxists.org/ebooks/lenin/state-and-revolution,pdfa€!> had managed to construct, in their 
imagination,
more-than-satisfactory utopias with only a small amount of the technological power to manipulate 
nature and to organize humans in our highly, highly-productive 8 billion-strong division of labor 
that we have today. Considered as an anthology intelligence, humanity is inept, and not sane.

This is, perhaps, the place to tell the story Plutarch tells, of King Pyrrhus and his advisor 
Cineas: Plutarch:

[Cineas:] 'When all [kingdoms] are in our power what shall we do then?' Said Pyrrhus, smiling, 'We 
will live at our ease, my dear friend, and drink all day, and divert ourselves with pleasant 
conversation.' When Cineas had led Pyrrhus with his argument to this point: 'And what hinders us 
now, sir, if we have a mind to be merry, and entertain one another, since we have at hand without 
trouble all those necessary things, to which through
much blood and great labour, and infinite hazards and mischief done to ourselves and to others, we 
design at last to arrive?' Such reasonings rather troubled Pyrrhus with the thought of the 
happiness he was quitting, than any way altered his purpose, being unable to abandon the hopes of 
what he so much desired.

For an entire anthology-intelligence species to properly set and balance ends and means in order to 
successfully accomplish what its best self truly desires is, of course, much harder considered as a 
coordination problem than for an individual brain controlling a single animal organism to do so. 
Nevertheless, the second key to the history of the 20th century, just behind the key that is the 
understanding of the enormous unprecedented leap forward in our
technological prowess, is the recognition of how unintelligently humanity has chosen and is 
choosing the goals it is devoting its anthology-intelligence focus to pursuing.

What went wrong? Well, Hayek may have been a genius, but only the Dr. Jekyll-side of him was a 
genius. He [Hayek] and his followers were extraordinary idiots as well.

Truth be told, I actually think Hayek was about 1/4 genius and 3/4 idiot. Is macroeconomics was 
completely stupid, and enormously at variance with his microeconomic insights as well. That the 
extremely clever market economy could not find a way to respond to a monetary injection (whether 
coming from a gold discovery or a central bank expansion) other than by grossly over-investing in 
excessively roundabout and long-term unsustainable production
processes? That having so over-invested, it had no way to unwedge itself than to shift huge numbers 
of workers from now low-productivity investment-goods production to zero-productivity unemployment? 
Come on! Be serious! His respect for the time-honored wisdom of the of the ages in human social 
organization combined with his contempt for such and for all countervailing-power institutions in 
the economy? Ludicrous. a€~And then there is the dodging-
and-weaving Hayek: complaining to Paul Samuelson about the "malicious distortion" Samuelson 
committed by summarizing Hayek's position as "government modification of market laissez-faire must 
lead inevitably to political serfdom", yet in his 1956 forward to The Road to Serfdom we find:

Six years of [Labour Party] government in England have not produced anything resembling a 
totalitarian state. But those who argue that this has disproved the thesis of The Road to Serfdom 
have really missed... that the most important change which extensive government control produces is 
a psychological change... over... generations.... The change undergone by the character of the 
British people... can hardly be mistaken. The British

experience convinces me... is that the unforeseen but inevitable consequences of socialist planning 
create a state of affairs in which. totalitarian forces will get the upper hand.

Macro, society-economy, rhetorical honesty a€’’against those three faces of the Bad Hayek we have 
the Good information-theoretic Hayek, who is very good indeed: 
https://delong.tvpepad.com/sdi/2014/08/over-at-equitable-growth-vet-another-note-on-mont-pelerin-thi
nking-some-more-about-bob-solows-view.htmla€! You can quibble that Michael Polanyi saw further and 
deeper, and that Polanyi's distinction between "mercenary" and "fiduciary" modes of
human activity is of decisive importance for understanding the proper place of the market in 
society, and you would be right. But Hayek got to the mountaintop to see what was on the other side 
first, 
<https://delong.tvpepad.com/sdi/2014/08/over-at-equitable-growth-vet-another-note-on-mont-pelerin-th
inking-some-more-about-bob-solows-view.html>


They [Mr. Hyde-Hayek and his idiot followers] also thought the market alone could do the joba€”or 
at least all the job that could be donea€”and commanded humanity to believe in the workings of a 
system with a logic of its own that mere humans could never fully understand: a€oeThe market 
giveth, the market taketh away; blessed be the name of the market.a€D They thought that what 
salvation was possible for humanity would come
not through St. Paul of Tarsusa€™ s solo fide but through Hayeka€™ s solo mercato. But humanity 
objected.

Karl Polanyi wrote that the Hayekian project, in which humanity is made rich as a byproduct of 
profit-motivated economic agents responding to the price signals sent by the rich was a:

stark utopia. Such an institution could not exist for any length of time without annihilating the 
human and natural substance of society; it would have physically destroyed man and transformed his 
surroundings into a wilderness. Inevitably, society took measures to protect itself, but whatever 
measures it took impaired the self-regulation of the market, disorganized industrial life, and thus 
endangered society in yet another way. It was this
dilemma which forced the development of the market system into a definite groove and finally 
disrupted the social organization based upon it

Think of it: Your community and its associated land-use and sociability patterns ("land"), your 
occupations and its remuneration on a scale appropriate to your status and to your desert resulting 
from your applying yourself ("labor"), and the very stability of and your ability to be paid for 
performing your job at all (a€oefinancea€n)a€”all of these melt into air if they do not satisfy 
some maximum-profitability-use-of-resources test (a€oefictitious commoditiesa€D)
imposed by some rootless cosmopolite thousands of miles away. Furthermore, it is a 
maximum-profitability test that is applied, not a societal-wellbeing test The (competitive, 
externality-free, in-equilbrium) market system definitely and certainly maximizes something. But 
what it maximizes is not any idea of the well-being of society, but rather the wealth-weighted 
satisfaction of the rich.

So society responded: people believe that they have other rights rather than property rights (which 
are valuable only if your particular piece of property is useful for producing things for which the 
rich have a serious jones). And so they strove to organize society to vindicate those other 
Polanyian rights. And so society did so by attacking the market, and by attacking all of those it 
saw as its internal and external enemies that the global market system was
empowering to oppress them.

Polanyi, writing in 1943 and thereabouts as Rotmistrov threw his 5th Guards Tank Army T-34s into 
the abattoir at Prokhorovka in an insanely one-sided loss ratio to keep the Nazi SS tank divisions 
"Adolf Hitler's Bodyguards", "The Empire", and "Death's Head" from breaking through in the one 
operation that might have won the Battle of Kursk for the Nazis, the most striking thing about this 
double movementa€”the market attempts to destroy society in the
interest of creative-destruction and satisfying the desires of the rich, society strikes backa€”was 
the extraordinary size and violence of the cataclysm that, from 1914 to 1945, destroyed human 
progress that had, during the 1870 to 1914 Belle A%opoque, seemed a marvelous and unmerited 
miraculous and stable gift to humanity. "Economic El Dorado", in Keynes's words in 1919. Polanyi:

Nn evnlanatinn ran satisfv which does not account for the suddenness of the e.atac.lvsm As if the 
forces of chancre had been nent nn for a centnrv a torrent of events is nonrincr down on mankind A 
social transformation of nlanetarv rancre. is heina tonned hv wars of an iinnreo.edented tvne in 
which a score of states crashed and the. contours of new emnires are eme.reriner out of a sea of 
hlood Rut this fact of demoniac, violence is merelv


*       -------------------------------- ----------- —           ™— w—-------------------- — 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------——©-------------
 — —-. f—..  —£-------- — -—-—..^.J, —        — . ——.„ ■*“     — '■**---------- *----—----- -- —. 
*----------- - --- ------------- — * f,*——-——O-           ——“D     “ ,

superimposed on a swift, silent current of change which swallows up the past often without so much 
as a ripple on the surface! A reasoned analysis of the catastrophe must account both for the 
tempestuous action and the quiet dissolution.

Polanyi wrote at the midpoint of the 1870-2010 Long 20th Century. After 1945 things were put back 
together, and there was another age, a Super-Belle A%opoch, the Thirty Glorious Years of social 
democracy, during which the great and good of humanity, at least in the North Atlantic plus Japan, 
could think that they had finally gotten it right. It was attained not by returning to a more 
purified and ruthless version of the pseudo-classical semi-liberal Hayekian
system, not by building the New Man in the New Order of market-free Socialism, and not by 
recognizing that good societies are unified communities for which their charismatic leaders serve 
as the thongs that bind the bundle of sticks together, and so make the Fascist people strong.

It was attained, rather, by compromises cobbled-together. John Maynard Keynes with a shotgun 
blessing the hasty wedding-under-duress of Friedrich A. von Hayek and Karl Polanyi. But that 
social-democratic order did not pass its own sustainability test, and gave way to neoliberalism, 
which repeatedly failed to deliver the goods, and now here we are.

The market economy solved the problems that it set itself [of making humanity rich as a byproduct 
of fulfilling the desires of those with valuable property rightsa€’’getting the rich their luxuries 
and the middle-class their conveniences]a€’’but then society did not want those solutions. It 
wanted solutions to other problems, problems that the market economy did not set itself, and for 
which the crowdsourced solutions it offered were
inadequate. It was, perhaps, Hungarian-Jewish-Torontonian moral philosopher Karl Polanyi who best 
described the issue. The market economy recognizes property rights. It sets itself the problem of 
giving those who own propertya€”or, rather, the pieces of property that it decides are 
valuablea€”what they think they want. If you have no property, you have no rights. And if the 
property you have isnot valuable, the rights you have are
very  thin indeed.

Cf.:


rad DeLong's Grasping Reality

RHETORICAL QUESTION: Why Do Economists Ignore AMe Greatest of All Market Failures?

Trevon D Logan: a€™ This is actually a deep point DeLong is making: we have not recognized the 
single largest market failure in the economy. And we rarely talk about it as a market failure at 
all. The aa€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 10 likes A- 4 comments A- Brad DeLong

As I wrote back then: I remember back in thea€! spring of 1981,1 think it was. I asked my 
professor, William Thomson, visiting from Rochester, roughly this: "The utilitarian social welfare 
function is I©u = U(l) + U(2) + U(3)a€! The competitive market economy maximizes a market social 
welfare function I©m = I%o( l)U(l) + I%o(2)U(2) + I%o(3)U(3)a€!, where the I%o(i)s are Negishi 
weights that are increasing functions of your lifetime wealth W(i)a€”
indeed, if lifetime utility is log wealth, then I%o(i)=W(i). Market failures drive wedges between 
what the economy achieves and what it could achieve. There are massive, massive differences between 
the I©u that is the true social welfare function and the function I©m that the well-working market 
maximizes. Why isna€™ t the unequal distribution of ex ante expected lifetime incomea€’’inequality 
of opportunitya€’’conceptualized by US economists as the
greatest of all market failures?" Thomson did not have a good answer.

My other teacher Joe Kalt, however dida€”an answer that old Freddie from Barmen and Charlie from 
Trier would have endorsed. People who talk about the Pareto-optimality of the market rather than 
about the divergence between the market's and the real Societal-Wellbeing Function are in the 
business of justifying that wealtha€’’however acquireda€’’should be the source of social power, and 
they are not in the business of working for the public interest. Most
are in this business because it is relatively lucrative.

Others have a somewhat deeper rationale. Friedrich von Hayek, for example, was convinced to his 
dying day and beyond that no better political-economic system than the market and private property 
could be devised, and that attempts to do so inevitably put us on the road to, well, serfdom. Thus 
justifications of the "optimality" of the market perform the same function in Hayek's Republic as 
the claim that those chosen to be guardians have souls of gold perform's
in Plato's. But Plato never claims that the purveyors of the noble lie that beguiles the citizens 
of his Republic were philosophers.

But people think they have other rights [than property rights, which are themselves only worth 
anything only if their property is valuable] a€’’they think that those who do not own valuable 
property should have the social power to be listened to, and that societies should take their needs 
and desires into account. Now the market economy might i n fact satisfy their [the non-rich's] 
needs and desires. But if it did so, it did so only by accident:
only if satisfying them happens to conform to a maximum-profitability test performed by a market 
economy that is solving the problem of getting the owners of valuable pieces of property as much of 
what the rich want as possible.

The idea that the market economy is a societal machine for satisfying the desires not of the 
people, but rather of the people with disposable incomea€”that is an old one, dating back to the 
mid-1700s and to Richard Cantillon's "Essay on the General Nature of Commerce". But it is not one 
that is highlighted in most economics coursesa€”that the market listens to you more-or-less in 
proportion to your disposable wealth. That is instead hidden beneath the statement
that the market considers your wishes according to your willingness-to-paya€”as if it were purely a 
matter of individual will, rather than at least as much a matter of the social power your wealth 
assigns to you.

When I teach Econ 1,1 replace "willingness to pay" with "intensity of desire times wealth." In 
general, in a market economy, if you have property or skills both useful for producing things for 
which the rich have a serious Jones and scarce, he will do OK. Otherwise not so much. Moreover, 
even if you are doing okay now, the creative destruction of the market system, especially in the 
long 20th century in which human technological capabilities are doubling and
thus the economy is being revolutionized every generation creates great instability: if the 
particular value chain in which you are enmeshed shifts, or if your particular bargaining power 
within it changes up, whatever economic position and social power you have may will vanish 
overnight as the fabric of your life fails to pass some maximum-profitability test inflicted by 
some rootless cosmopolite financier thousands of miles away.

THIS IS NOT HOW PEOPLE THINK THEIR SOCIETY SHOULD WORK!!

As Karl Polanyi put it, the market system attempts to create a "stark utopia" by destroying all 
sources of social power and all societal bonds except those mediated by wealth. And 
societya€’’which has very different ideas about who should have social power and who should be 
listened toa€”reacts, by trying to damage the market system and damage those whom it decides are 
the rootless cosmopolites and their allies who are misusing it to the detriment of the
people, the real, essential, worthy people. This has a long history. When Karl Marx began writing, 
the word he used for the concept he later labelled "bourgeois" was "Jewishness".

So throughout the long twentieth century, communities and people looked at what the market economy 
was delivering to them and said: 'Did we order that?'a€d.

That last reference is to Nobel Prize-winning physicist LI. Rabi's quip in response to the 
identification of the muona€”an elementary particle that seemed then to be nothing other than a 
much heavier version of the electron. The point is that the industrializing market economy in the 
context of much more rapid technological progress fueled by the phase-shift from the coming of full 
globalization, the industrial research lab, and the modern was certainly producing
something. But it was not producing what humanity had ordered for the era of progress that 
visionaries had hoped would be launched by the Belle A%opoque that began in 1870. It was not 
producing anything that could be called a real utopia, substantially because the market economy was 
solving the problem of getting those who owned valuable property the luxuries they thought they 
wished, rather than solving the problem of making a truly human world for us


all.

And society demanded something else, The idiot Mr. Hyde-side of Friedrich von Hayek called it [what 
society demanded in addition to the vindication of property rights] 'social justice', and decreed 
that people should fuggedaboudit: the market economy could never deliver social justice, and to try 
to rejigger society so that social justice could be delivered would destroy the market economya€™ s 
ability to deliver what it could delivera€”
increasing wealth, distributed to those who owned valuable property rights.

In a way, von Hayek's point-of-view was as mystical as Marx, Lenin, and Trotsky's. Edmund S. Wilson 
noted, in his "To the Finland Station", that what Trotsky at least wrote made absolutely no sense 
unless you replaced "history" and "dialectic of history" with "Providence" and "God". Hayek has a 
very similar attitude toward the catallaxy. It was not designed by humanity. It cannot be improved 
by humans. For humans to even question it is impious, a violation
of taboo, and brings down awful retribution and judgment.

Much wiser than von Hayek, I think, was Michael Polanyi, for whom both fiduciary and mercenary 
institutions have their proper place, and they can be (partially) designed, improved, and kept 
within their proper bounds by humans acting consciously and collectively.

Do note that in this context [the] 'social justice' [thata society demanded] was always only 
'justice' relative to what particular [powerful] groups desired: not anything justified by any 
consensus transcendental principles. Do note that it was rarely egalitarian: it is unjust if those 
unequal to you are treated equally. But the only conception of 'justice' that the market economy 
could deliver was what the rich might think was just, for the property
owners were the only people it cared for."

If we were to give Friedrich von Hayek the mic, he would say that the attempts by holders of other 
forms of social power to upend the workings of the market had to be destructive in terms of their 
effect on wealth-creation, and were at best neutral in terms of their effects on 
wealth-distribution. They brought more chaos and uncertainty to an already chaotic world, and so 
risk aversion made them a bad idea even if their revolutions could be quick and relatively
painless. The social fabric of the Habsburg Empire was nothing to be proud of, but there was no 
gain in expected value by replacing it with one imposed by storm troopers, whether Steel Helmets or 
Red Guards or the ethno-nationalism of some particular relatively small grouping of valleys. The 
moral arc of the universe, von Hayek would have said, does not bend toward justice. Only a fool 
thinks it does. So all we can do is to try to calm everybody down, keep
the (social) peace, and let obedience to market forces deliver what they can delivera€”and they can 
deliver marvelous things. From the standpoint of the 20th-century history of Vienna, Budapest, 
Prague, Zagreb, Belgrad, or Cracow, Hayek's argument looks rather strong. It looks less strong from 
the standpoint of London, Paris, New York, or Los Angeles.

Plus, the market economy is powerful but very very imperfect even on its own terms of reference. It 
cannot by itself deliver enough research and development, for example, or environmental quality, 
or, indeed, full and stable employment.

The problems of "externalities "and "market power ": anytime there is somebody who is not a 
participant in a bargain who is materially affected by its terms and conditions, the argument that 
a bargain is win-win with no downside fails. And anytime there is not somebody just down the street 
able to offer an alternative bargain just as good, holdup problems will ensure that the market 
leaves substantial wealth on the table. A well-functioning market economy
needs very aggressive antitrust and price-posting to support it. A well-functioning market economy 
needs an enormous structure of Pigovian taxes and subsidies to point it in the right direction.

There is, in Chicago-School folklore, a very strange belief that Ronald Coase with his "The Problem 
of Social Cost", disproved Pigou: that there are no externalities, there are only transaction costs 
resulting mostly from the failure to properly set up initial property rights by appropriately 
carving up the beast "at the joints" so that the relevant parties could make the needed 
externality-incorporating arrangements. There are references to a 1959 dinner at the house of
Aaron Director,.where Coase convinced 20 initially very skeptical economists, including Friedman 
and Stigler, that Pigou was simply "wrong".

What was supposed to be Coase's argument-clinching pointa€”that if the farmer has the right to keep 
sparks from the locomotive from.lighting his crops on fire, the railroad gets to decide whether to 
buy out that right or not; while if the railroad has the right to emit sparks, the farmer gets to 
decide whether to buy out that right or not, and so there is not an "externality" but merely a 
"transaction cost"(i.e., in this case a"holdup") problem. Thus it does not matter
who holds the property right as long as somebody holds it. Now that argument is simply wrong. If 
the railroad has the property right, it installs a flamethrower on top of.the locomotive before the 
bargaining begins. It doesn't do that if the farmer has the property right.

Moreov3r, a world in which there are no significant transaction costs... that is not a market 
economy, that is a free society of associated producersa€”a verydifferent thing indeed. The claims 
that "the market will take care of it", and that government failure is always and everywhere a 
bigger danger than market failure rest on the claim that market failuresare typically small. Yet 
that claim is ideological in the extreme, not empirical at all.

No:a€™ a€~The market giveth, the market taketh away; blessed be the name of the market' was not a 
stable principle around which to organize society and political economy. The only stable principle 
had to be some version of 'The market was made for man, not man for the market'.

The references, of course, are to Job 1:21: "And [he] said 'Naked came I out of my mother's womb, 
and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name 
of the Lord.'" And Mark 227: "And he said unto them, 'The sabbath was made for man, and not man for 
the sabbath'. The.point is that human societies will not long stand for the inversion of values 
associated with the apotheosis of the Mammon of Unrighteousness.
Society must work or must at least be perceived to work on a human scale. Now there is an argument 
that simply letting the market rip and hoping for the best is the best attainable option. But that 
can be sustained only when the "creation" part of Schumpeter's creative destruction is very large, 
and the "destruction" part unusually small. How to accomplish that is to borrow a phrase my teacher 
Charlie Kindleberger used in a different context, "a neat trick... sleight
of hand, some trick with mirrors". The problem is that those who worship the Mammon of 
Unrighteousness that is the market cannot understand that hard and clever work is required to make 
that happen. They do not understand that in order to make that happen you actually need mechanics 
so that the two boats can sail, and the one helicopter can fly, in the terms of the old joke.

But who were the men who counted, for whom the market should be made? And what version would be the 
best making? And how to resolve the inevitable squabbles over the answers to those questions?

Simply concluding that the creative-destruction of the technological progress-fueled market had to 
be somehow leashed got humanity to precisely nowheresville. Humanity needed a plan. And it needed 
to be a good plan. Much of the failure of humanity to use its technological powers during the Long 
20th Century 1870-2010 to approach utopia had to do with the absence of a good plan, or indeed of 
any .coherent plan at all, or even of a mechanism to filter
possible plans to reach near-consensus on one probably-good one that then could be turned into 
running code.

John Maynard Keynes saw this lack in the early 1920s, and expressed it well in a review he wrote of 
the work of Leon Trotsky <https://marxists.org/historv/etol/document/comments/keynesO 1 ,htma€!>: 
Keynes:

Granted his assumptions, much of Trotskya€™ s argument is... unanswerable.... But what are his 
assumptions? He assumes that the moral and intellectual problems of the transformation of Society 
have been already solveda€”that a plan exists.  He is so much occupied with means that he forgets 
to tell us what it is all for. If we pressed him, I suppose he would mention Marx. And there we 
will leave him with an echo of his own

wordsa€’’’together with theological literature, perhaps the most useless, and in any case the most 
boring form of verbal creation.' Trotskya€™ s book must confirm us in our conviction of the 
uselessness, the empty-headedness of Force at.the present stage of human affairs.  We lack more 
than usual a coherent scheme of progress, a tangible ideal. All the political parties alike have 
their origins in past ideas and not in new ideas a€“ and

none more conspicuously so than the Marxists. It is not necessary to debate the subtleties of what 
justifies a man in promoting his gospel by force; for no one has a gospel. The next move is with 
the head, and fists must wait.

In the Thirty Glorious Years after World War II, it seemed as though mixed-economy social-democracy 
was the plan, but that failed its political sustainability test in the 1970s. At the end of the 
1990s many (including me) claimed that "soft" left-neoliberalism was the plan, but its failure to 
surpass the bar has been far more glaring than social democracy's failures in its day. And "hard" 
right-neoliberalism has delivered on none of its promises save to create and
entrench a corrupt plutocracy.

So we are still waiting.

As Max Weber <https://soc.upenn.edu/sites/default/files/Weber-Science-as-a-Vocation.pdf> once 
wrote:

For the many who tarry today for new prophets... the situation is the same as... the... song of... 
exile...

Watchman, how much longer will this dark night last?' 'The morning will come, but then the night 
will return. Ask when you want to. And return to ask again.

From this we want to draw the lesson that nothing is gained by yearning and tarrying by themselves, 
and we shall act differently. We shall set to work and meet 'the demands of the day' in human 
relations as well as in our vocations...

But in spite of what Weber tries to claim at the end of "Wissenschaft als Beruf", meeting 'the 
demands of the day' without a prophet with a good plan is not easy. Not easy for each of us. Not 
easy for all of us.

Throughout the long twentieth century, many othersa€”Karl Polanyi, John Maynard Keynes, Benito 
Mussolini, and Vladimir Lenin serve as good markers for many of the currents of thought, activism, 
and actiona€’’tried to think up solutions.

How do you keepa€”or perhaps improve upona€”the incentives for efficient production, rapid creative 
destruction, and technological advance that the private-property market economy provides, without 
also buying into its proviso that only property conveys rights that allow one to count in the eyes 
of society's decision-making processes? Keynes thought the problem could be .finessed with an 
extremely light-handed amount of central planning: full-employment
policy, and the euthanization of the rentier class by the low interest rates need to implement 
full-employment policy, would do enough of the job to make the economic problem cease being a 
bigger deal than the problem of the continued survival of Disco.

Karl Polanyi thought that human recognition of society's demands for more rights than property 
rights would be the key:

Acceptance of the reality of society gives man indomitable courage and strength.  As long as he is 
true to the task of creating more abundant freedom for all, he need not fear that either power or 
planning will turn against him and destroy the freedom he is building by their instrumentality.

That peroration may have satisfied Polanyi, but I have no idea what it means.

Mussolini took the strength of ethno-nationalism to teach the lesson, as Polanyi says, that humans 
must "resign [themselves] to relinquishing freedom and glorif[y the] power which is the reality of 
society", just as a single stick that claims to be free is soon broken, while if it loses its 
freedom in a stick-bundle tied with leather thongs it becomes a mighty force in the hand of its 
wielder.
Lenin suffered from the infantile mental disorder of believing that upon the removal of the market 
the oppressive state would also wither away, and all would be very simple and easy, for:

Accounting and control necessary. have been simplified by capitalists to the utmost and reduced to 
the extraordinarily simple operationsa€’’which any literate person can performa€”of supervising and 
recording, knowledge of the four rules of arithmetic, and issuing appropriate receipts.

Thus:

They [Polanyi, Keynes, Mussolini, Lenin, and uncountably many others] dissented from the 
pseudo-classical (for the order of society, economy, and polity as it stood in the years after 1870 
was in fact quite new), semi-liberal (for it rested upon ascribed and inherited authority as much 
as on freedom) order that Hayek and his ilk advocated and worked to create and maintain. They did 
so constructively and destructively, demanding that the
market do less, or do something different, and that other institutions do more.

As I said above, recognition that people reject the idea that social power .should be distributed 
according to wealth (whether earned, windfall, or inherited) and mediated purely through the cash 
nexus is not an answer to the problem of managing creative destruction, but merely a recognition 
that there is a question. The answer remains opaque and obscure. Finding an answer became an 
extremely pressing need after 1870, as technological progress doubled
humanity's collective powers to manipulate nature and organize themselves not every 1450 years (as 
in the pre-1500 Agrarian Age), not every 500 years (as in the 1500-1770 Imperial-Commercial Age), 
not every 160) years (as in the 1770-1870 Industrial Revolution Age, but every 35 years in the 
post-1870 Modern Economic Growth Age. Without an answer, and a good answer, to how to manage such a 
pace of creative destruction, society would react against the
logic  the market was imposing on it, and in the process smash things to bits.

Perhaps the closest humanity got [to the road to a real utopia, to a truly human world] was the 
shotgun marriage of Hayek and Polanyi, blessed by Keynes, that took form in post-World War II North 
Atlantic developmental-state social democracy. But that institutional setup failed its own 
sustainability test. And so we are still on the path, not at the end, and unsure whether the path 
leads anywhere.
And so we are still, at best, slouching toward utopia.

That the pseudo-classical semi-liberal order of the 1870-1914 Belle A%opoque fell apart into so 
many different catastrophes after 1914 is readily comprehensible. Governments and A©lites failed to 
manage economic creative-destruction at the fever-heat pace at which it lurched forward after 1870, 
as full globalization, the industrial research lab, and the modern corporation all came on stream. 
The failure-to-manage led to many, many societal reactions against the
ongoing rush of claims that all was OKa€”that "the market giveth, the market taketh away: blessed 
be the name of the market". The demands and then the attempts to build a better New Ordera€”or 
rather, multiple attempts to do soa€”turned at least Europe into a hellhole and an abattoir until 
1945.

And then things were somehow righted. And history began to rhyme, as the pattern of an upward lurch 
to unprecedented economic growth and technological change after 1870 that created the Belle 
A%opoque was followed by another upward lurch to super-unprecedented economic growth after 1945 
that created the Thirty Glorious Years of social democracy: the most golden of Golden Ages, as far 
as visible progress toward a true utopia, a truly human world,
was concerned.


Yet it did not last: by the late 1970s social democracy failed its political-economy sustainability 
test, in a way somewhat reminiscent of post-1914 loss of confidence in pseudo-classical 
semi-liberalism. Yet why the judgment of the Great and Gooda€”and of the voters at the pollsa€”that 
what was needed was A Neoliberal Turn remains obscure to me, even though I lived through it.
With sentence 86, my "Slouching" reaches the first of its pauses. By this point I have run through 
my Grand Narrative, which I chose not because it was true but because it was the least false one I 
could think of, and I badly needed a Grand Narrative on which to hang the structure of the book.

The one I chose is, broadly, a Polanyian one. And I freely avow myself a pupil of that mighty 
thinker. But instead of turning him on his head, I have merely mixed him with flavors of Keynes and 
von Hayek. (Alas! I have not managed to also mix in the flavors of Schumpeter, Popper, Drucker, and 
Karl Polanyi's younger brother Michael. That would have required a book with pages numbering in the 
four digits, which Basic would have been very unlikely to
publish. But I dearly feel the absence.)

Now, in the next passage in my manuscript, I turn to defending and explaining why I feel I have to 
have a Grand Narrative at all, and why the one I have chosen has the virtue of being least-false:
Return to my claim above that the long twentieth century was the first century in which the most 
important historical thread was the economic one. That is a claim worth pausing over.

The [long 20th] century saw, among much else, two world wars, the Holocaust, the rise and fall of 
the Soviet Union, the zenith of American influence, and the rise of communist China. How dare I say 
that these are all aspects of one primarily economic story? Indeed, how dare I say that there is 
one single most consequential thread?"
Let alone boldly and baldly assert that that single most consequential thread was the economic one?

Technological advance in the context of a globalized market economy as the coming of modern science 
assisted by the industrial research lab and the modern corporation discovered, developed, deployed, 
and then diffused enough new technologiesa€’’enough new and better ideas about how to manipulate 
nature and organize humansa€”to double humanity's collective technological prowess every 
generation, and thus to revolutionize and re-revolutionize the
economy every single generation from 1870 to 2010. How dare I assert that, you ask?

I dare assert it because it is true.

And you cannot understand even a smidgeon of history over 1870 to 2010 without starting from d deep 
grasp of that economic process and its impact on everything else.

I dare [assert my Grand Narrative that the economic thread is by far the most important thread of 
the history of the long 20th century] because we have to tell grand narratives if we are to think 
at all. Grand narratives are, in the words of that bellwether twentieth-century philosopher Ludwig 
Wittgenstein, 'nonsense.' But, in a sense, all human .thought is nonsense: fuzzy, prone to 
confusions, and capable of leading us astray. And our fuzzy
thoughts are the only ways we can thinka€”the only ways we have to progress. If we are lucky, 
Wittgenstein said, we can 'recognizea€!. them as nonsensical', and use them as steps 'to climb 
beyond them ... [and then] throw away the ladder'a€’’for, perhaps, we will have learned to 
transcend 'these propositions' and gained the ability to 'see the world aright'.

This is a personal milestone: I have never had occasion to quote Ludwig Wittgenstein before.

I am trying at this point in the manuscript to pull off a double movement: First, to assert the 
"truth" of my Grand Narrativea€”for it is true, or rather if you do not presume that it is true you 
cannot think about the history of the long 20th century at all. Second, that the Grand Narrative is 
falsea€”a crutch that we need because our East African Plains Ape monkey-brains can only think in 
narratives. Thus it is a crutch that is essential to us. But it is a crutch that
breaks when .we lean on it.

I really do not know how to think about this: Paradox of knowledge? Paradox of ignorance? The 
ultimate "motte & bailey" intellectual move?

It is in hopes of transcending the nonsense to glimpse the world aright that Ia€™ ve written this 
grand narrative. It is in that spirit that I declare unhesitatingly that the most consequent thread 
through all this history was economic.

In short, if you are to understand anything at all about the history of the long 20th centurya€”if 
your thoughts are to be even somewhat coherent, and somewhere in the neighborhood of what a much 
vaster scrutinizing intelligence might call "the truth", you have to start from the premise that 
the axis around which history revolved from 1870-2010 was that of the economic trends, events, 
patterns, and transformations that rocked the world, not once, but every
single generation again and again and again.

Moreover, you have to hold tight to the true knowledge that the long 20th century was the first 
century in which this was true. In all previous centuriesa€”with the partial exception of 
1770-1870a€”the economic side was the painted backdrop in front of which the play proceeded, with 
the economy becoming a protagonist in history only when we stepped back from any single-century 
perspective and took the millennial perspective of the longue durAOe.

The British Industrial Revolution century was a partiala€”a very partiala€’’exception to this. In 
the radius-300 miles "Dover Circle" and its offshoot economies, by 1870 humanity's discovered, 
developed, deployed, and diffused technological prowess stood at 2.5x its level of 1770.


Ideas Ideas Real Popula-
Growth Stock Income/ tion P

^ate Rate■h L■evel Capi■ta y (millions)

-48000

-8000 0.000% 0.036             $1,200         0.1

Total
Income Y
(billions)

$0.12



-6000 0.003% 0.038               $900

0.2

$0.18


-3000

-1000

150

800

1500

1770

1870

0.015% 0.060

0.035% 0.120

0.048% 0.207

0.022% 0.240

0.096% 0.471

$900

$900

$900

$900

$1,000

$1,400

$2,800

0.5

2

6

8

25

75

175

$0.45

$1.80

$5.40

$7.20

$25.00

$105.00

$490.00


2010 2.514% 67.989

$50,000

800

$40,000.00


By 1870, in the "Dover Circle" plus offshoots, roughly and approximately, on average what it had 
taken 250 workers to do in 1770 it took only 100 workers to do in 1870. That economic change had 
upended society, culture, and politics within the "'
After 1870, that much economic creative-destruction upending everything else would take place every 
generation.

Circle" (plus offshoots). But it had only done so once. And it had taken 100 years.'

And if we step outside the 300-mile radius Dover Circle, and look at the world as a whole? For the 
world as a whole humanity's deployed technological prowess was only some 3/5 higher than it had 
been in 1770.


i ne vvur IU


Technological
Ideas-Stock

Technological Average Annual Total Human Total Real
Ideas Stock Real Income per Population P World Income


&ate Growth Rate h

Level H (1870 = 1)

Capita y (millions) Y (billions)


—

-48000      0.002%

0.011

$1,200

0.2

$0.24


-8000

-6000

0.003%

0.009%

0.036

0.043

$1,200

$900

2          $2.4

5          $4.5


-3000      0.018%

-1000      0.030%

0.074

0.136

$900          15

$900          50

$14

$45


150

800

1500

0.060%

0.014%

0.052%

0.272

0.297

0.429

$900

$900

$900

200

240

500

$180

$216

$450


That was certainly enough to shake thrones and altars and shift patterns of authority, hierarchy, 
coordination, and gift- and market-exchange. But outside the Dover Circle, the meat and fish of 
history over 1770-1870 remained the dance of culture, society, war, conquest, and politics, with 
the economic being the scene backdrop and arranging the furniture on stage before and as the actors 
entered and the play of history began.

Before 1870, over and over again, technology lost its race with human fecundity, with the speed at 
which we reproduce.

Simply reminding readers that humanity was ensorcelled by the Devil of Malthus before the start of 
the Long 20th Century: improvements in technology flow overwhelmingly to increasing human numbers, 
very secondarily to the material benefit of the rich, (and tertiarily to sharpening the incentives 
of the powerful to dominate and their capabilities to do so,) and otherwise leave humanity stuck in 
poverty without positive liberty, living "the same life of
degradation and imprisonment" in the words of John Stuart Mill.

Greater numbers, coupled with resource scarcity and a slow pace of technological innovation, 
produced a situation in which most people, most of the time, could not be confident that in a year 
they and their family members would have enough to eat and a roof over their heads.

Figure, very very roughly, $2.50 per day as the living standard for a not-atypical human back 
before 1500, or, indeed 1870. Things were different for upper and middle classes, and for favored 
members, at least, of working classes during "efflorescences". But most humans during the long 
Agrarian Age lived in what the World Bank today would classify as on the edge of extreme poverty. 
And they did not have access to the village smartphone, or to the public
health that gives our people living on $2.50/day a life expectancy at birth of 60 instead of 30.

Why were they so poor? Well, consider: in an Agrarian Age society, durable social power for women 
(and for men too) rests on being the mother (father) of surviving sons, themselves reproducing. But 
in a world of slow population growth, 1/3 of couples wind up having zero. That means that, at the 
margin, given that you face that 1/3 risk of ending up sonless, what do you do with extra 
resources? Yup. Try to have another boy. And if the average couple has 2.01
children themselves surviving to reproduce, smaller farm sizes and the greater resource scarcity 
that creates will eat up all of the potential higher-standard-of-living benefits from the 
glacially-slow Agrarian-Age growth of human technological prowess.

Before 1870, those able to attain such comforts had to do so by taking from others, rather than by 
finding ways to make more for everyone (especially because those specializing in producing, rather 
than taking, thereby become very soft and attractive targets to the specializers in taking).

This is, I think, one key difference between the old days and now. We see shadows of what we have 
become in the "efflorescences" of past eras, when Imperial Peace actually allowed commerce to 
flourish. And those times were, indeed great times for those days. But the prospects for us are so 
much greater.

The ice was breaking before 1870. Between 1770and 1870 technology and organization gained a step or 
two on fecundity. But only a step or two.

Worldwide, between 1770 and 1870, population grew by 0.55%/year and my estimate of average real 
income per capita grew at 0.17%/year. Using my rule-of-thumb that the value of the human 
deployed-ideas stock in the world economy is average income per capita times the square-root of 
population, that gives us a rate of growth of technological prowess of 0.44% per year over that 
British Industrial Revolution century

Such a rate-of-increase of the deployed-ideas stock could be neutralized, as far as its effect on 
average human standards of living is concerned, by population growth at 0.88% per year. What we 
actually got, worldwide, since 1870 has been population growth at 1.18%/year. If we had not had a 
further upward leap in the pace of growth of our technological prowess after 1870, odds are that 
increasing human average material prosperity would have come to a stop
around 1900, with average incomes around $4.25/day. Since then, if our global technology had 
continued to advance at the pace of the British Industrial Revolution century, our world population 
would have grown from 1.5 billion to 4 billion, with average living standards worldwide like those 
of Eritrea or Mozambique actually saw in 1905 or soa€”the year that Henry Ford announced that he 
could build the Model T (it then took three years to get that 20-hp
vehicle rolling off the assembly line); and that Leonardo Torres y Quevedo and A. KindelAjn built 
the dirigible "EspaA+a". Our counterfactual steampunk world today with such technology would have 
been a lot poorer than the world actually was back in 1905: Outside China and India average income 
per capita in 1905 was something like $8/day; including China and India the world average in 1905 
was something like $6/day. Why the greater poverty?

Supporting 4 billion rather than 1.5 billion people on circa-1905 agricultural technology would 
have been very hard.

All this counterfactual Steampunk World today assumes that the world would have kept up the 
1770-1870 pace of advance of deployed technology. But that depended on really cheap coal. And, as 
W. Stanley Jevons had pointed out, the really cheap coal was being rapidly exhausted. A slowdown in 
the pace of worldwide deployed and diffused technology after 1870 to the 0.15%/year pace of the 
Imperial-Commercial Revolution 1500-1770 age would give us
today ca.-1885 technology and a world of 2 billion people, at an average income of maybe 
$3.25/daya€”what Croatia or Peru had in 1800.

That, of course, is not the world we got. Around 1870 the rate of growth of human technological 
prowess, powers to manipulate nature and organize humans, discovered, developed, deployed, and 
diffused around the world, jumped up from 0.44%/year to 2.1%/year. And that has made all the 
difference between the counterfactual Steampunk Worlds today of 1885-level technology and 2 billion 
people, or 1905-level technology and 4 billion people, and us.

In the early 1870s that British establishment-whig economist, moral philosopher, and bureaucrat 
John Stuart Mill claimed, with some justification, that a€oeit is questionable if all the 
mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the daya€™ s toil of any human being ,a€D You have to 
go forward a generation after 1870 before general and broadly distributed material progress becomes 
unquestionable.

Mill did say that, as of 1870, mechanical inventions had enabled a much larger comfortable middle 
class, and had fabulously enriched plutocrats. But his normal Benthamite utilitarianism gave him a 
near-Rawlsian take on the value of different societiesa€”that the marginal utility of wealth 
declines steeply enough that any sensible social welfare function is very close to simply being the 
standard-of-living of the working class. That take on the SWF has to, I think,
be the take of any moderately competent economist. And it is always a marvel to me that such a 
small proportion of economists seem moderately competent in this way.

Mill's declaration was thus (a) a claim that hitherto mechanical inventions had not been such hot 
stuff, plus (b) a claim that humanity was using those inventions badly from the standpoint of 
accomplishing human flourishinga€”not even slouching towards utopia.

I think that combination of claims about the 1770-1870 world is broadly right. But that rightness 
should not lead you to forget that the ice had broken up over 1770-1870a€”a proportional rate of 
growth h of the value H of the human deployed-and-diffused stock of technology of some 0.44%/year 
worldwide, and of some 0.91%/year in the 300-mile-radius circle around the southeast England port 
of Dover, plus its offshoots and successful emulators elsewhere.
The world on average was still ensorcelled by the Devil of Malthus in 1870. But that was no longer 
true for the Dover-Circle-Plus. It, over 1770-1870, saw rough average annual rates of growth of 
0.85%/year in population (via natural increase, immigration, and emulation), and an 
absolutely-stunning-in-the-perspective-of-all-past-history 0.69%/year in living standards and 
productivity levels.

My guess was that that extraordinary century 1770-1870 in the Dover-Circle-Plus was driven 5/6 by 
technological advancement (and supporting physical and human capital investment) and 1/6 by 
resource engrossment via conquest, settlement, theft, and purchase. But I could be wrong. And that 
is something to think hard about.

And the ice could then have resolidifieda€”the nineteenth-century technologies of steam, iron, 
rails, and textiles were approaching their culmination point; moreover, they all depended on 
hypercheap coal, and the hypercheap coal was being exhausted.

Could humanity have missed the on-ramp to modern economic growth? Could humanity's pace of 
technology growth have fallen back below its 0.44%/year 1770-1870 pace, or stayed at that pace, but 
failed to make it through to the demographic transition, and so had a near-static average real 
income level to our day? Or were full globalization to make it profitable to diffuse technology, 
industrial research labs to rationalize and routinize the discovery and
development of technology, and modern corporations to rationalize and routinize the development and 
deployment of technology a€’’were these all close-to-inevitable once humanity had taken the fork in 
the historical road that led to steampower and textile machinery?

My hunch is that without a good and strong theory about why things that look like sharp 
phase-transitions are inevitable, odds are that they are a matter of chance and contingency. But I 
do not know how I would even start going about testing that hunch.

But tell anyone from before the long twentieth century about the wealth, productivity, technology, 
and sophisticated productive organizations of the world today, and their likely response, as noted 
above, would be that with such enormous power and wealth in our collective hands we must have built 
a utopia. That is in fact what they did tell us. Perhaps the third best-selling novel in the United 
States in the nineteenth century was Looking
Backward, 2000a€“1887, by Edward Bellamy. Bellamy was a populist anda€’’although he rejected the 
namea€”a socialist: he dreamed of a utopia created by government ownership of industry, the 
elimination of destructive competition, and the altruistic mobilization of human energies."

There would by 2000 be, Bellamy thought, more than enough for everyone to live comfortably. And 
with more than enough, everyone should relax beneath their own vine and fig tree, rather than 
struggle to deprive others of what was rightfully theirs. The only reason to struggle to deprive 
was if it was the way for you to get enough. That was Bellamy's underlying logic. What Bellamy did 
not see was that people would think that it was bad that the undeserving
would get the enough that they did not deserve. And what people did not see was that the cost you 
paid for their being enough was that you found yourself enserfed to the logic of the 
marketplace^’’where you had no rights other than those given you by your property, and where your 
property rights were worthless unless they were helpful in producing things for which the rich had 
a serious jones.

Technological and organizational abundance, [Edward Bellamy] believed, would generate a society of 
abundance. His novel, therefore, was a a€oeliterary fantasy, a fairy tale of social felicitya€D, in 
which he imagined a€oehanging in mid-air, far out of reach of the sordid and material world of the 
present... [a] cloud-palace for an ideal humanity."

And Bellamy saw no reason why that palace for ideal humanity might not be attained before our day. 
The northern mobilization for the Civil War had, he thought, shown the enormous powers of humanity 
when mobilized for good and the enormous willingness of humanity to bend the moral arc of the 
universe towards justice. Add on the marvels of modern science and technology, and all the things 
that had blocked utopiaa€”that had kept humanity fighting over
mine and thinea€”would melt away. How could it not be the case that a humanity that could send 
400,000 young men South to die to free 5,000,000 slaves could fail to use awesome technological 
powers to take us all up into the cloud-palaces of the utopian future?

[Edward Bellamy] throws his narrator-protagonist forward in time, from 1887 to 2000, to marvel at a 
rich, well-functioning society. At one point the narrator-protagonist is asked if he would like to 
hear some music. He expects his hostess to play the piano.

Bellamy's point is going to be that the technological marvels of the year-2000 allow for the 
incredible amplification of even the wonders of civilizationa€”in this case, the wonder of 
civilization that is the incredible versatile piano. This alone would be testament to a vast leap 
forward. To listen to middle-class music on demand in around 1900 you had to havea€”in your house 
or nearbya€”an instrument, and someone trained to play it. It would have cost the
average worker some 2,400 hours, roughly a year at a 50-hour workweek, to earn the money to buy a 
high-quality pianoforte. Then there would be the expense and the time committed to piano lessons." 
Listening to middle-class moderate-quality music in your house was a privilege reserved to the 
rich. It was something that Edward Bellamy dreamed would be democratized in the world of 
technological abundance and human solidarity that he dreamed that the
vear 2000 would see. Anvone could listen to music in their house! And not iust the performance of 
one amateur performer! Professional music, orchestral musica€”and vou would have a choice of one of 
four currentlv-olavins orchestras that vou could dial UP on vour soeakernhone. That was what Edward 
Bellamv chose as his example of the wonders of human flourishing that technologv and solidaritv. 
the utooia that he thought was hidden in the womb of the


then-present.

We have far exceeded his hopes of technology. We have fallen far short of what he thought would be 
the development of solidarity. And where moon? When Lambo? Where utopia?

But Bellamya€™ s narrator-protagonist is awed when .his hostess does not sit down at the pianoforte 
to amuse him. Instead, she a€oemerely touched one or two screws,a€D and immediately the room was 
a€oefilled with music; filled, not flooded, for, by some means, the volume of melody had been 
perfectly graduated to the size of the apartment. a€~Grand!a€™ I cried. a€~Bach must be at the keys 
of that organ; but where is the organ?
a€™

Where indeed? In 1884 the Atlanta telephone exchange served over 300 customersa€’’albeit at very 
low fidelity. (Also: "gramophone" was trademarked in 1887.) But Bellamy's is the first mention I 
know of as using the telephone network for broadcasting one-to-many provision of services to people 
not gathered in a concert hall.

[Edward Bellamya€™ s narrator-protagonist .in Looking Backward: 2000-1887] learns that his host has 
dialed up, on her telephone landline, a live orchestra, and she has put it on the speakerphone. In 
Bellamya€™ s utopia, you see, you can dial up a local orchestra and listen to it play live. But 
wait. It gets more impressive. He further learns he has a choice. His hostess could dial up one of 
four orchestras currently playing. The
narratora€™ s reaction? a€oelf we [in the 1800s] could have devised an arrangement for providing 
everybody with music in their homes perfect in quality, unlimited in quantity, suited to every 
mood, and beginning and ceasing at will, we should have considered the limit of human felicity 
already attained.a€D

Think of that: the limit of human felicity. That is the most that Bellamy thinks he can demand of 
technology in terms of promoting human flourishing and comfort: that you have a choice of which 
orchestra you can dial up on your speakerphone. That is the limit of his imagination. Oh. And his 
characters have Amazon Primea€”but they have to goto showrooms rather than browse the internet. And 
they goout to eat rather than cooking at home.And nobody is
overworked. And everyone is middle-class.

Thus the thing that strikes me most about Edward Bellamy's year-2000 utopia of common purpose and 
material abundance is both how less in the way of technological prowess it requires than we have 
today, and yet how far we still are from it psychologically. "The limit of human felicity". Think 
of that.

Utopias are, by definition, the end-all and.be-all. a€oeAn imagined place or state of things in 
which everyone is perfecta€D: so says Oxford Reference. Much of human history has been spent in 
disastrous flirtations with ideals of perfection of many varieties. Utopian imaginings during the 
long twentieth century were responsible forits mostshocking grotesqueries. Citing a quotation from 
the eighteenth-century philosopher Immanuel
Kanta€”a€oeout of the crooked timber of humanity no straight thing was ever madea€Da€”the 
philosopher-historian Isaiah Berlin concluded a€oeand for that reason no perfect solution is, not 
merely in practice, but in principle, possible in human affairs,a€D Berlin went on to write, 
a€oeany determined attempt to produce it is likely to lead to suffering, disillusionment, and 
failure.a€D This observationalso points to why I see the long
twentieth century as most fundamentally economic. For all its uneven benefits, for all its 
expanding human felicity without ever reaching its limit, for all its manifest imperfections, 
economics during the twentieth century has worked just shy of miracles.

Berlin's translation of Kant may not be completely honesta€”your mileage may vary. Kant's "Aus so 
krummem Holze, als woraus der Mensch gemacht ist, kann nichts ganz Gerades gezimmert werden" Kant 
has a sense of imperfectiona€”the things that cannot be made are not "completely straight things": 
there must be compromises with the reality imposed by the material of which society is built up. 
Berlin, by contrast, has simply "straight things", and the sense
is not of imperfection but of failure. Indeed, Berlin'sentire career can be seen as one long 
sustained argument that government in particular and human collective action in general should be 
confined to the very narrow sphere of simply trying to establish tolerance, so that each can sit 
under his vine and fig tree, and not be afraid.

Freedom from fear is, yes, very important, and an essential part of it is freedom of worship. 
Freedom of speech can also be seen as part of the vine-fig-peace trinity of bare stripped thin 
liberalism. But there is also, in FDR's.taxonomy, freedom from want. John Stuart Mill rejected the 
firm divide Isaiah Berlin wanted to draw between good "negative" and bad so-called "positive" 
liberty. Society needs to arrange things so that everyone in fact has their own vine and
fig tree. Lacking those, people, no matter how much negative liberty they have, are condemned to 
"the same li[ves] of drudgery and imprisonment".

But let us accept Berlin's broadening from "completely straight" to simply "straight". There is an 
important and valid insight to be gained here: Edward Bellamy was all but sure that with the 
technological marvels he saw the 20th century as likely to bring and with the human solidarity that 
had led 400,000 young men to go South and die in the decisive push to free 5 million slaves, it 
should be simple and straightforward to build for humanity a real utopia by 2000.
But: crooked timber. Technology enables people to make more and more sophisticated things. And one 
the things people are best at making is, in the words of the brilliant late novelist Iain M. Banks, 
is "their own unhappiness".

Utopian aspirations, many of them based on ideas of how to organize society's division of labor, 
have been the source of much misery in the 20th century when people attempt to put them into 
practicea€”to force people to become a straight thing. "We need to replace the anarchy of the 
market with a society that takes direction from a Leader" was one such, and the worst such when the 
Leader's directions were to exterminate Jews, kill Slavs and herd those
whosurvived into concentration camps, all so that German farmers could be fruitful, multiplying, 
and flourishing on large farms with black earth. But only slightly behind was the idea that we need 
to replace the anarchy of the market with one particular leader's idea of how Imperial German had 
run its WWI-era war economy. Thirda€”and not nearly as deadly as the first twoa€”was the idea that 
the most we could ask for was the market's "stark utopia", in Karl
Polanyi's words, and that societies needed "Lykourgan moments ".after which all elsea€”even 
(especially?) democracy a€’’would be subordinate to the creed: "the market giveth, the market 
taketh away; blessed be the name of the market".

And, yet, the engine of technological advance has given humanity at least 21 times the 
technological power we had in 1870, and 300 times the prowess of the age of Gilgamesh, King of 
Uruk, two-thirds god and one-third man, who sought deathlessness and learned wisdom. For those of 
us lucky enough to take substantial advantage of that technological pro wessa€’’which is by now 
more than half of usa€”there are vines and fig trees galor! Taco trucks on every
corner!

But also surveillance systems, and thermobaric and nuclear weapons.

The consequences of the long twentieth century have been enormous: Today, less than 9 percent of 
humanity lives at or below the roughly $2-a-day living standard we think of as a€oeextreme 
poverty,a€D down from approximately 70 percent in 1870. And even among that 9 percent, many have 
access to public health and mobile phone communication technologies of vast worth and power.

This is one key consequences of the 2%/year global productivity growth we have seen since 1870, the 
doubling every generation of human deployed technological prowess, and the creative-destruction 
every generation revolutionizing and then re-revolutionizing of the economy: humanity is no longer 
desperately poor, as it was even in 1900. Yes, it is still the case that 10% of us are desperately 
poor, with material living standards day-to-day not that different
from our typical Agrarian-Age ancestors. But even they have double and triple the life expectancy 
of the Agrarian Age. And they have access to our communications and information technologiesmat 
some level. And for the remaining 7.2 billion of us, we are all, by the standards of all previous 
civilizations, at least members of the comfortable middle class (called "middle class" not because 
they were near the mediana€”they weren't: they were in the upper
15%a€”but because they stood between the rich and the poor, and their wealth was "middling").

That dire poverty is now a problem of a (substantial) number of very poor people in what are, by 
previous standards, middle-class countries, rather than that the overwhelming number of people in 
all countries are desperately poora€”that is a tremendous human achievement.

Today, the luckier economies of the world have achieved levels of per capita prosperity at least 
twenty times those of 1870, and at least twenty-five times those of 1770a€”and there is every 
reason to believe prosperity will continue to grow at an exponential, if perhaps somewhat slower, 
rate in .the centuries to come. Today, the typical citizens of these economiescan wield powersa€”of 
mobility, of communication,of creation, and of
destruction^’’that approach those attributed to sorcerers and gods in ages past. Even the majority 
of those living in unlucky economies confront not the $2- to $3-a-day living standard of those 
economies in 1870 or before, but an average closer to $15 a day.

a€oePowers akin to sorcerers and gods", like flying down to LA for the day, and thinking little of 
it. Odin had twoa€”only twoa€”ravens to fly around the world, act as his eyes and ears, and report 
back to him. Zeus and Thor could throw thunderbolts. Demeter could make crops grow much more 
abundantly. We do that, and much more.

The many technological innovations of the past century have transformed experiences that were rare 
and valued luxuriesa€’’available only to a rich few at great expensea€”into features of modern life 
that we take so much for granted that they would not make the top twenty or even the top one 
hundred in an ordered list of what we think our wealth consists of. So many of us havegrown so 
accustomed to our daily level of felicity that we
utterly overlook something astounding. We todaya€”even the richest of usa€”rarely see ourselves as 
so extraordinarily lucky and fortunate and happy, even though, for the first time in human history, 
there is more than **enough**."

People in past ages thought it was clear what would happen when there was **enough**a€”when, for 
the first time in human history, the struggle to gain **enough** for your self and your family was 
not overwhelmingly difficult and of overwhelming importance. As John Maynard Keynes put it, we 
shall then:
value means above ends and prefer the good to the useful.. We shall honour those who can teach us 
how to pluck the hour and the day virtuously and well, the delightful people who are capable of 
taking direct enjoyment in things, the lilies of the field who toil not, neither do they spin...

But that turned out not to be the case. Instead, as RichardEasterlin puts it, the creation of 
potentially enough is: "a hollow victory.  The triumph of economic growth is not a triumph of 
humanity over material wants; rather, it is the triumph of material wants over humanity."

There are, now, more than enough calories produced in the world, so it is not necessary for anybody 
to be hungry. There is more than enough shelter on the globe, so it is not necessary for anybody to 
be wet. There is more than enough clothing in our warehouses, so it is not necessary for anybody to 
be cold. And there is more than enough stuff lying around and being produced daily, so nobody need 
feel the lack of something
a€ oenecessary a€U.

In short, we are no longer in anything that we could call a€oethe realm of necessity.a€D And, as G. 
W. F. Hegel said: "Seek food and clothing first, and then the Kingdom of God shall be added unto 
you.a€D So, one would think, we humans ought to be in something recognizably utopian. That we 
cannot accept this is another consequence of living our lives fully in the stream of economic 
history. While history fueled by utopian
aspirations is an all-or-nothing proposition, economic historya€™ s successes and failures are most 
often experienced in the margins. Which is partly why no full-throated triumphalism over the long 
twentieth century can survive even a brief look at the political economy of the 2010s: the 
stepping-back of the United States from its role of good-guy world leader and of Britain from its 
role as a key piece of Europe; and the rise in North
America and Europe of political movements that reject democratic representative consensus 
politicsa€’’movements that former US secretary of state Madeleine Albright has called 
a€cefascista€D (and who am I to tell her she is wrong?).

Indeed, any triumphalist narrative would collapse in the face of the conspicuousfailures over the 
previous decade by the stewards of the global economy.

And this is why the book's title starts: "Slouching. ", with its echoes of the "rough beast" of 
Yeat's "The Second Coming", that poem must plundered of all in the twentieth century. With material 
abundance, good-willed people should have been able to build here on earth, if not the Kingdom of 
the Heavens, at least an Earthly Paradisea€”"paradise", is, after all, the Farsi word for a walled, 
irrigated garden. Fig trees and grape vines for everyone! Taco trucks on

every corner! And none shall be afraid! Except. many of us are very afraid, of something and 
somethings. And that makes the rest of us, rationally, very afraid as well.

Yes, during the years between 1870 and 2010 technology and organization repeatedly lapped 
fecundity. Yes, a newly richer humanity resoundingly triumphed over tendencies for population to 
expand and so for greater resource scarcity to offset more knowledge and better technology. But 
material prosperity is unevenly distributed around the globe to a gross, even criminal, extent. And 
material wealth does not make people happy in a
world where politicians and others prosper mightily from finding new ways to make and keep people 
unhappy. The history of the long twentieth century cannot be told as a triumphal gallop, or a 
march, or even a walk of progress along the road that brings us closer to utopia. It is, rather, a 
slouch. At best.

The failure of the cornucopia of the long 20th centurya€’’four successive creatively-destructive 
revolutions of the economy, one happening every generation, each of which doubled humanity's 
deployed technological competence to manipulate nature and organize humansa€”to allow us to draw 
nearer to something we would recognize as a real utopia is at the crux of the history of the long 
20th century. Maldistribution, and associated disrespect, vulnerability, and
violations of perceived rights are at the heart of the problem. A cooperative free society of 
associated producersa€”that not we have.

One reason why human progress toward utopia has been but a slouch is that so much of it has been 
and still is mediated by the market economy: that Mammon of Unrighteousness. The market economy 
enables the astonishing coordination and cooperation of by now nearly eight billion humans in a 
highly productive societal division of labor. But the market economy also recognizes no rights of 
humans other than the rights that come with
the property their governments declare they possess. And those property rights are worth something 
only if they help produce things that the rich want to buy. That cannot be 'justice' or 
'fairness'".

The market rations good things, allocating them to those with the greatest willingness-to-pay. 
Willingness-to-pay is, roughly, desire (or need) times wealth:



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

RHETORICAL QUESTION: Why Do Economists Ignore AMe Greatest of All Market Failures?

Trevon D Logan: a€™This is actually a deep point DeLong is making: we have not recognized the 
single largest market failure in the economy. And we rarely talk about it as a market failure at 
all. The answer: thata€™ s how they wanted it when they sold it to you! Anyone who has seriously 
thought about equilibrium theory knows that the lack of attention to enda€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 10 likes A- 6 comments A- Brad DeLong

Only if peoplea€™ s wealth levels are in accord with society's ideas of relative merit and 
deservingness will people look at the market's allocation of good things and say "this is just" or 
"this is fair". That simply does not happen. And if you have gross maldistribution, you do not have 
utopia.

As I noted above, that genius-idiot Dr. Jekyll-Mr. Hyde figure of the 20th century Friedrich von 
Hayek always cautioned against listening to the siren song that we should seek justice, rather than 
mere productivity and abundance. We needed to bind ourselves to the mast. Interference in the 
market order, no matter how well-intentioned or technocratically-justified when it started, would 
send us into a downward spiral. It would put us on a
road to, well, some industrial-age variant of serfdom.

Abundance, equitability, human flourishing. Hayek saw more clearly than anybody else how, in the 
context of modern science and technology, the market economy could bring forth abundance. He, 
however, say this as coming at the price of sacrificing all hopes of equitability. But he also 
claimed that paying any attention at all to equitability would inevitably destroy both abundance 
and any hope of human flourishing.
This was, as somebody-or-other once said, a Fatal Conceit.

It was, rather, the Stark Utopia of "the market giveth, the market taketh away: blessed be the name 
of the market" that would lead to reaction and catastrophe, not the cobbled-together compromises of 
incoherent social democracy.

Perhaps we can excuse Hayek: Somebody who lived his first 32 years in Red Vienna might well have 
seen market-driven prosperity as extremely fragile, and all those who wanted to soften its edges as 
useful idiots for the Bolsheviks. But after 1931 von Hayek lived for a very long time in Britain 
and in the United States, but was unable to learna€’’either about Anglo-Saxon political economy, or 
about how the business cycle really worked. And if you cannot
learn, you lose your intelligence and your social utility quite quickly.

But Karl Polanyi responded that such an attitude was inhuman and impossible: People firmly 
believed, above all else, that they had other rights more important than and prior to the property 
rights that energized the market economy. They had rights to a community that gave them support, to 
an income that gave them the resources they deserved, to economic stability that gave them 
consistent work. And when the market economy tried to
dissolve all rights other than property rights? Watch out!

This is, I think, the crux of the answer to my question of why the technological production 
cornucopia of the long 20th century has enabled us only to, at best, slouch towards utopia.

Utopia requires production of enough, but it also requires right distribution and right utilization 
of what is produced. The a€oeright distributiona€D for any particular society will not be one that 
accords either with market property-owner or social-democratic egalitarian logic or with some 
linear combination of the two. Right distribution for a particular society will follow logics of 
security, stability, status, and deservingness. Perhaps a particular order will pass its
sustainability test given how it is bound to inevitably fall short in those dimensions if it 
delivers enough economic growtha€’’enough of a€oeyou never had it so gooda€D. Perhaps not.

And right utilization of our wealth? Ha! We East African Plains Apes recently down from the trees 
with our jumped-up semi-intelligent monkey brains have a hard time even beginning to grasp what 
that might be. But when we dona€™ t think we have gotten it, we are very resentful of the system 
that has failed to defiver.

Slouching, however, is better than standing still, let alone going backward. That is a truism no 
generation of humanity has ever disputed. Humans have always been inventive. Technological advance 
has rarely stopped. The windmills, dikes, fields, crops, and animals of Holland in 1700 made the 
economy of its countryside very different from the thinly farmed marshes of 700. The ships that 
docked at the Chinese port of Canton had much
greater range and the commodities loaded on and off of them had much greater value in 1700 than in 
800. And both commerce and agriculture in 800 were far more technologically advanced than they were 
in the first literate civilizations of -3000 or so.

Longest-Run Global Economic Growth


Date

-73000

-68000

Ideas
Growth
Rate      h

Ideas
Stock
Level     H

0.008

Real
Income/
Capita      y

$1,200

$1,200

Popula­
tion P
(millions)

0.005

0.1

Total
Income Y
(billions)

$0.12

Population Efficiency-
Growth n Growth g

0.060%      0.000%


-48000

-8000

-6000

-3000

-1000

0.002%

0.003%

0.009%

0.018%

0.030%

0.011

0.036

0.043

0.074

0.136

$1,200

$1,200

$900

$900

$900

0.2

2

5

15

50

$0.24

$2.4

$4.5

$14

$45

0.003%

0.006%

0.046%

0.037%

0.060%

0.000%

0.000%

-0.014%

0.000%

0.000%


150

0.060%

0.272

$900

200

$180

0.121%      0.000%


800

1500

0.014%       0.297

0.052%       0.429

$900

$900

240

500

$216

$450

0.028%

0.105%

0.000%

0.000%


1770

1870

2010

2100

0.149%

0.442%

2.159%

2.000%

0.643

1.000

20.557

108.893

$1,100

$1,300

$11,600

$53,802

750

1300

6900

9000

$825

$1,690

$80,040

$484,214 ?

0.150%

0.550%

1.192%

0.295%

0.074%

0.167%

1.563%

1.705%


2200

2.000%     804.618       $397,543

9000

$3,577,883 ?

0.000%     2.000%


2.000% 324606.13| $160,380,105             9000

$1,443,420, ?

0.000%     2.000%


Let me stress this for the moment: There is an immense gap, a more than twenty-fold gap, between 
the deployed technological prowess of the human race today and where we stood back in 1870. But 
there was an equally large proportional gap between where humanity stood, in terms of deployed and 
diffused technologya€’’ways of manipulating nature and organizing people productively a€”in 1870 
and where we had stood back in -6000, at the end of the first
wave of the global diffusion of agriculture and herding.

Yes, technological progress was glacial in the Old Days, in the days of the long Agrarian Age. You 
could not tell that there was an upward drift to technology in general over the course of any 
single person's life.

But between -6000 and 1870 stood 160 consecutive lives. And that addeda€”or, rather, 
exponentialeda€”up to something impressive in its own way. But nearly none of that twenty-fold 
amplification of human deployed and diffused technological prowess between -6000 and 1870 went to 
higher living standards for the typical human. Nearly all of it went to compensating for resource 
scarcity as 1870 saw not the 5 million human population of -6000 but rather 1.3
billion of us.

But before our age, back in the preindustrial Agrarian Age, technological progress led to little 
visible change over one or even several lifetimes, and little growth in typical living standards 
even over centuries or millennia.

Not just slow growth in living standards over a human lifetime, but effectively no growth in an 
average period in the material living standards of a typical human over a lifetime, or even a 
century. Now "average period" matters here; "typical human"a€”i.e., excluding the A©litea€’’matters 
here; and "material" matters here. Nevertheless, it is striking: how different was the life of a 
slave of Gilgamesh in the year -3000 to the life of a slave of Jefferson Davis or
Stephen Douglas in 1850? Can anybody argue with a straight face that the differences were large?

Recall my very crude index that tracks the value of humanitya€™ s useful ideas about manipulating 
nature and organizing collective effortsa€”an index of our a€cetechnology,a€D as economists call 
it. To calculate it, assume that each 1 percent increase in typical human standards of living 
worldwide tells us that the value of our useful ideas has risen by 1 percent. That is simply a 
normalization: I want the index to scale with real income,
and not with something else, such as the square root of or the square of income. Also assume that 
each 1 percent increase in the human population at a constant typical living standard tells us that 
the value of useful ideas has risen by 0.5 percenta€”for such an increase is necessary to hold 
living standards constant in the face of resource scarcities that emerge from a higher population. 
This is a way of taking account of the fact that, since
our natural resources are not unlimited, we depend on added human ingenuity to support a larger 
population at the same standard of living as we would depend on it to support the same population 
at a higher standard of living.

I find, or at least I think I find, such a rough and crude efforts at quantifying things that are 
not really quantifiable to be useful for my thought, or at least I think that they are in some way 
useful. We are wired to think that large differences are important differences, and that important 
differences are large differences. Thus this index is a (very crude) way of trying to get our 
handle on just how important differences that are largea€”even if highly dimensional and
substantially qualitativea€”are, doing so by turning them into a (crude) quantitative difference.

Your mileage may well vary here.

Set this quantitative index of the global value of useful human knowledge equal to a value of 1 in 
1870, at the start of the long twentieth century. Back in the year -8000, when we discovered 
agriculture and developed herding, the index stood at 0.04: roughly, and on average across the 
globe, with the same materials and on the same size farms, it would take twenty-five workers in 
-8000 to do what one worker could do in 1870. By the year
1, eight thousand years later, this index was 0.25: with the same resources, better 
a€cetechnologiesa€D meant that the typical worker was now more than six times as productive as the 
typical worker had been back at the beginning of the Agrarian Agea€”but only one-quarter as 
productive as the typical worker of 1870. By the year 1500, the index stood at 0.43, more than 70 
percent above the year 1 and a little less than half the value of
the year 1870.

1 know, I know.

Constructing an index numbera€”a one-dimensional summary measure of an inherently multi-dimensional 
quantity, many aspects of which cannot be properly quantified at all is in the best of all possible 
worlds a fool's errand, almost surely a fount of misleading misinformation, and at its worst 
poisonously destructive of coherent thought. (Remind me to talk about Ian Morris sometime.) But I 
am trying to get you to grasp the importance of huge qualitative shifts,
and I have decided that the best way to do this is via quantitative measures, for a large-enough 
quantity has, to our jumped-up monkeybrains, a quality of its own. To say that human "technology" 
was amplified fourfold from the year 1 to 1870, and six-fold from -8000 to 1, creates in your 
brains the impression I want it to. And it then sets the stage for the twenty-fold amplification in 
the value of the stock of useful ideas about manipulating nature and organizing
humans that were discovered, developed, deployed, and then diffused throughout the human economy 
from 1870 to 2010.

These are impressive changes in the index numbe. They summarize and gesture at, from the standpoint 
of those who lived eight thousand years ago, truly miraculous and impressive enlargements of the 
human empire since. Technologies of the year 1500, the Ming pottery or the Portuguese caravel or 
the wet cultivation of rice seedlings, would have seemed almost unbelievably marvelous to those 
first discovering that spoiled barley
porridge was actually fun to drink.

But this growth up to 1500, and the pace of invention necessary to drive it, took place over an 
enormous span of time: thus technology crawled ahead at a glacial pace, only 0.036 percent per year 
for the entire period between 1 and 1500a€”that is only 0.9 percent over an average 
twenty-five-year lifetime of that age.

The point is that technology and economy, at no time before the modern age, advanced far and fast 
enough over any single human lifespan to derange the pattern of society. "All that is solid melts 
into air" wrote Charlie from Trier and Freddie from Barmen back in 1848. But the pace of growth in 
humanity's deployed and diffused technological progress then was less than 1/4 of the pace we are 
used to, when measured worldwide, and only a bit more than 1/3 of
the pace we are used to when you confine yourself to the lucky economies of the charmed Dover 
Circle (plus New England).

Charlie and Freddie saw the patterns of the capitalist economy driving the bourgeoisiea€”the 
business classa€”to push forward technology and investment at a previously unprecedented pace that 
would **steam away** all establishments and order. But since 1870 we have seen what they sawa€”but 
speeded up by a factor of four, making the stresses on (and opportunities for) human psychology, 
society, and polity an order of magnitude greater. And what they
saw as a process likely to be completed in a generation or twoa€”as they mistook the birth pangs of 
modern economic growth for the death throes of the capitalist ordera€”we have seen hitting us hard 
for, by now, five consecutive generations.

And did greater knowledge about technology and human human organization cause the life in 1500 of a 
typical person to be much sweeter than it had been in -8000? It turns out not. The human population 
grew at an average rate of 0.07 percent per year from year 1 to 1500, and this 0.07 percent per 
year decrease in average farm size and other available natural resources per worker meant that more 
skillful work produced little, if any,
additional net product on average. While the elite lived far better in 1500 than they had in -8000 
or the year 1, ordinary peoplea€’’peasants and craftsmena€’’lived little or no better than their 
predecessors.

This point leans very heavily on a very strong Malthusian interpretation of agrarian age economic 
history. And we do know that a nutritionally-unstressed pre-artificial birth control human 
civilization will tend to more than quadruple its numbers in a century. That agrarian-age 
populations typically grew by less than 10% tells us a lot about how hungry such populations were. 
And I bet that if they were rich enough so that the typical human could have consumed
conveniences and luxuries on a large scale, they would not havea€”they would have shifted more 
production to necessities so as not to have been so hungry and malnourished. But that is a bet.

Agrarian Age humans were desperately poor: it was a subsistence-level society. On average, 2.03 
children per mother survived to reproduce. A typical woman (who was not among the one in seven who 
died in childbirth, or the additional one in five who died before her children were grown, 
sometimes from the samecontagious diseases to which her children succumbed) would have spent 
perhaps twenty years eating for two: she would
have had perhaps nine pregnancies, six live births, and three or four children surviving to age 
five; and the life expectancy of her children remained under, and perhaps well under, thirty.

It is horrifying that the tenfold upward leap in human technology from -6000 to 1500 brought 
essentially no (and the 25-fold upward leap from -6000 to 1870 brought little) improvement in the 
material circumstances of a typical human. But it is not terribly mysterious.

Technological Technological Average Annual Total Human Total Real
Ideas-Stock Ideas Stock Real Income per Population P World Income

Da,e Growth Rate h Level H (1870 = 1) Capita y (millions) Y (billions)

-48000          0.002%             0.011          $1,200           0.2          $0.24

-8000         0.003%             0.036           $1,200            2           $2.4

-6000         0.009%             0.043            $900           5           $4.5

-3000          0.018%             0.074            $900           15           $14


-1000

150

800

1500

1770

1870

2010

0.030%             0.136            $900           50          $45

0.060%             0.272            $900          200         $180

0.014%             0.297            $900          240         $216

0.052%             0.429            $900          500         $450

0.149%             0.643          $1,100          750         $825

0.442%             1.000          $1,300         1300       $1,690

2.159%            20.557         $11,600         6900      $80,040

With glacially-slow technology improvement, we have glacially-slow population growth. That means 
1/3 of women have no surviving sons. And so at the margin it is overwhelmingly worthwhile to pour 
all your resources you can scrounge into trying to up the chances of having a surviving son, for in 
an agrarian-age subsistence-level society that is pretty much the only source of durable social 
power for a female. Thus Malthus rulesa€”until life expectancy rises
and infant mortality falls. But how are they to fall when technological progress is glacial?

Keeping your children from dying is the first and highest goal of every parent. Humanity in the 
Agrarian Age could not do so at all reliably. That is an index of how much pressure from material 
want humanity found itself under."

The curse of Malthus was indeed fearsome. And so there is some reason to view Malthus's 
intellectual position with less unsympathy than one otherwise might. Malthus's position was that 
the foes of familial patriarchy, political monarchy, and religious orthodoxy were short-sighted 
enemies of societal well-being. Why? Because the shorter the length of the typical woman's sexual 
activity, the higher was the setpoint human standard of living in Malthusian
equilibrium. Hence anythinga€’’any thinga€’’that controlled, constrained, and delayed female 
sexuality was worth doing. And in Malthus's world that was religious orthodoxy that constrained 
unsanctioned female sexual activity out of fear of damnation, and familial patriarchy that delayed 
female sexual activity by denying agency to daughters? And monarchy? It was a slippery slope 
argument: that "rights of man" would slide into "rights of woman", and then
Katie  bar the door.

Malthus, however, wrote very near the end of the Malthusian Agea€’’although people like John 
Maynard Keynes feared its reappearance after World War I; and the Ehrlichs' 1968 The Population 
Bomb's very first words were:

The battle to feed all of humanity is over. In the 1970's the world will undergo faminesa€”hundreds 
of millions of people are going to starve to death... [as] nothing can prevent a substantial 
increase in the world death rate...

However, over the millennia, 1.5 percent average population growth per generation added up, 
however. In 1500 there were about three times as many people as there had been in year la€”500 
million rather than 170 million. But additional humans did not translate to more individual 
material want. As of 1500, advances in technological and organizational knowledge went to 
compensate for fewer natural resources per capita. Thus
economic history remained a slowly changing background in front of which cultural, political, and 
social history took place.

This is onekey to the riddle of history. Before 1870a€”even over 1500-1770, and even over 
1770-1870a€”economic change was not fast enough to overthrow societies in a single generation. 
Alles StA^ndische und Stehende verdampfta€”NICHT! All establishments and orders were steamed 
away-NOT! The establishments and orders by and large stood, and history was people maneuvering 
within and around them as they guided the resource flows and directed
the power arrangements of society. Yesa€”there was change, but truly system-shattering economic 
changes took first millennia, and then centuries.

But post-1870 was to be very different indeed.

The ice started to groan and shift after 1500. Or perhaps a better metaphor is crossing a divide 
and entering a new watersheda€”you are now going downhill, and things are flowing in a new 
direction. Call this shift the coming of the age of the a€oeImperial-Commercial Revolution.a€D The 
pace of inventions and innovation sped up. And then, in around 1770, the ice was cracking as we 
crossed into yet a different watershed, as far as the
level of worldwide prosperity and the pace of global economic growth was concerned: call the 
century after 1770 the coming of the age of the a€oelndustrial Re volution.a€D By 1870 the index of 
the value of knowledge stood at 1, more than twice as large as in 1500. It had taken 9,500 years to 
get the tenfold jump from 0.04 to 0.43a€”an average time-to-double of some 2,800 yearsa€”and then 
the next doubling took less than 370 years.

Pause and reflect on that: Up until 1500, it took more than 2500 years for humanitya€™ s 
technological progress in manipulating nature and organizing humans for productive purposes to 
double. But then from 1500 to 1870 we get another more than doubling. That is an amazing 
accomplishment: an amazing shift of humanitya€™ s efforts away from an A©lite desperation to get 
enough for itself by robbing others and then dominating them so they could not
respond; to spending much more of societya€™ s effort on what Francis Bacon around 1600 called 
a€oethe enlargement of the human empire, to the effecting of all things possible.a€D

Note, however, that doubling humanitya€™ s technological competence in 300 years is not, by itself, 
enough to escape the harrowing of Malthus. We know that a poor nutritionally-unstressed human 
population without artificial means of birth control triples every 100 years. Human populations 
over 1500 to 1870 were not unstressed nutritionally, but they were less stressed than they had been 
before 1500. As technological competence grew by a factor of 2.3,
population grew by a factor of 2.6. The $900/year typical income world of 1500 did not produce the 
$1800/year typical income world of 1870 that a stable population would have given, but a world of 
only $1300. And as of 1870 world population was growing at 0.8 %/yeara€’’enough to neutralize the 
effects of better technology at the pre-1870 pace of technological development.

But, worldwide, technology took another upward leap around 1870: from 0.05%/year over 800 to 1500 
to 0.15%/year over 1500-1770 to 0.45%/year over 1770-1870 to 2.1%/year after 1870.

But did this mean a richer, more comfortable humanity in 1870? Not very much. There were then in 
1870 1.3 billion people alive, 2.6 times as many as there had been in 1500. Farm sizes were only 
two-fifths as large, on average, as they had been in 1500, canceling out the overwhelming bulk of 
technological improvement, as far as typical human living standards were concerned.

As of 1870, however, the final, decisive, technological-growth acceleration that mattered was still 
in the future. In the previous century not all but the bulk of the expansion of human possibilities 
for flourishing made possible by technology had been eaten up by population growth, and the 
resource scarcity population growth generated.

Around 1870 we crossed over another divide into yet another new watershed: the age Simon Kuznets 
called an era of a€oemodern economic growth.a€D During the period that would follow, the long 
twentieth century, there came an explosion.

After 1870, technological progress was so fast that population growth could not keep up: humanity 
became richer. And then we became richa€”and women became socially powerful enougha€”that we began 
to limit our fertility, undergo the demographic transition, and so population abandoned its attempt 
to grow to neutralize technological progress. Humanity thus became, by the standards of all 
previous ages and eons, fabulously rich.

The approximately 7 billion people in 2010 had a global value of knowledge index of 21.
Pause to marvel.

The value of knowledge about technolopv and organization had prown at an average rate of 2.1 
nercent ner vear. Since 1870. the technological canabilitv and material wealth of humankind had 
exnloded bevond nrevious imapininp. Rv 2010. the tvnical human familv no longer faced as its most 
urgent and imnortant nroblem the task of acouirinp enouph food, shelter, and clothinp for the next 
veara€”or the next week.


(a) Enough food that you are not thinking most of the time about how hungry you are; (b) enough 
clothing that you are not thinking most of the time about how cold you are; (c) enough shelter that 
you are not thinking much of the time about how wet parenthesis or sunburned) you area€”those are 
the most basic human needs. Running very close to those is (d) watching your children grow up, 
survive, and launch themselves on Eves of their own.
Then there is (e) enough technological power to manipulate nature and social power to organize 
humans to support making your contribution to standing on your own two legs (for all of us can only 
make a contribution', none of us can stand without major help from others). Accomplishing your 
other purposes, including (f) satisfying your curiosity and (g) avoiding excessive boredom.

Typical humans in 1870 and before could not satisfy those needs because, given the balance of 
resources and technology to population, humanity could not make enough. Indeed, the only way for 
even some to have enough was for them to focus their energy and social power not on a€oeenlarging 
the human empire for the effecting of all things possiblea€C but on dominating and 
oppressingothers, and takingothersa€™ stuff for themselves.

But by 2010 humanity was surely productive enough so that from the perspective of all societies as 
of 1870 and before, there was no problem in producing enough so that nearly everyone could use 
their share of resources to satisfy (a)-(g). As of 2010 the problem was, rather, as John Maynard 
Keynes had written back in 1930, for humans individually and collectively, a€oeto use freedom from 
pressingeconomic caresa€! occupythe leisure which science and
compound interest will have wona€! to live wisely and agreeably and wella€D, for, as Keynes saw in 
1930, in the Long 20th Century a€.c&mankind is solving its economic problema€d of limited resources 
and pressing needs and uses.

From the techno-economic point of view, 1870a€“2010 was the age of the industrial research lab and 
the bureaucratic corporation. One gathered communities of engineering practice to supercharge 
economic growth, the other organized communities of competence to deploy the fruits of invention. 
It was only slightly less the age of globalization: cheap ocean and rail transport that destroyed 
distance as a cost factor and allowed humans in
enormous numbers to seek better lives, along with communications links that allowed us to talk 
across the world in real time.

To put it another way, the industrial research lab fused science to technological innovation and 
technology to enterprise: a scientist could science, an inventor could invent, and a technologist 
could technologize without one person having to be all threea€”plus financier, manager, chief 
pitchman, human resource department, and so forth. Division of labor. And the bureaucratic 
corporation allowed the visible hand of management to scale a successful workshop and
store nationwide, or worldwide. And then there was diffusion: what one bureaucratic corporation 
could do, another could duplicate. And duplicate worldwide, with globalization. Discovery, 
development, deployment, and diffusiona€”the rationalization and routinization of those are what 
more than quadrupled the proportional rate of technological progress in the years around 1870.

235-242: The research laboratory, the corporation, and globalization powered the wave of discovery, 
invention, innovation, deployment, and global economic integration that have so boosted our global 
useful-economic-knowledge index. Marvel still. In 1870 the daily wages of an unskilled male worker 
in London, the city then at the forefront of world economic growth and development, would buy him 
and his family about 5,000 calories
worth of bread. That was progress: in 1800, his daily wages would have bought him and his family 
perhaps 4,000 coarser-bread calories, and in 1600, some 3,000 calories, coarser still. (But isna€™t 
coarser, more fiber-heavy bread better for you? For us, yesa€”but only for those of us who are 
getting enough calories, and so have enough calories to give us the energy to do our daily work and 
then worry about things like fiber intake. In
the  old days, you were desperate to absorb as many calories as possible, and for that, whiter and 
finer bread was better.) Today, the daily wages of an unskilled male worker in London would buy him 
2.4 million wheat calories: nearly five hundred times as much as in 1870.

Few people know or consider the extent to which, back even in 1870, for the working classes of even 
the richest countries in the world, sheer calories were a considerable constraint on your daily 
activities. You could work and do stuff until you had drained your energy budget and so were tired. 
Then you more or less had to stop. That the work or other stuff you could do was tightly 
constrained because you simply could not afford the calories that you needed to
do ita€”that is not a thing in the global north today. Yet that was an important part of the 
experience of humanity back before 1870.

From the bio-sociological point of view, this material progress meant that the typical woman no 
longer needed to spend twenty years eating for twoa€’’pregnant or breastfeeding. By 2010, it was 
more like four years. And it was also during this century that we became able, for the first time, 
to prevent more than half our babies from dying in miscarriages, stillbirths, and in infancya€”and 
to prevent more than a tenth of mothers from dying
in childbirth.

Consider a typical human agrarian-age civilization, with technological progress advancing at 5% per 
century, fast enough to support a 10% per century rate of population growth. We know that a 
pre-industrial no-artificial-birth-control nutritionally-unstressed human population will quadruple 
in a century. So what has to be going on in the typical agrarian age human civilization to keep 
average population growth in a century down to 10%? Three things: (a) social
institutions to keep women (but not men!) chaste for a substantial period of time between monarch 
and menopause, (b) women so skinny that ovulation is hit-or-miss, and (c) children so malnourished 
that their immune systems are substantially compromised.

Is it possible that conscious family planning could take up some of the slack? Yesa€”in France 
around 1800, but I am aware of no substantial historical evidence of that happening in other places 
at other times. How about large-scale female infanticide? Yesa€”in classical Greece and in a number 
of other times and places, but that requires not just extreme patriarchy but also substantial 
within-males inequality as well: it is much easier for a patriarch to decide to
kill some other mana€™ s daughter than his own.

Consider that in a society in which the only way for a woman to acquire durable social power is to 
be the mother of surviving sons. Consider that in a slowly growing population, the Poisson 
distribution tells us that about 1/3 of women will not manage to accomplish this. Consider that all 
women will fear that they will wind up one of those 1/3. Thus for a very large share of women, from 
the moment your father says he is old and established enough to have bright
prospects or your fiancA© says your father has provided a large enough dowry or your fiancA©a€™ s 
older brother says that there are now enough resources for him to bring a bride into the clan 
house, fertility is a principal task.

Consider that we can do the math: 2 children surviving to reproduce means 3 reaching adulthood, 4 
reaching age 5,6 or 7 live births, perhaps 9 pregnancies (considering that you are under 
substantial nutritional stress and pregnant: a€oehave a baby, lose a tootha€D). 9 months per 
pregnancy, perhaps three years nursinga€”you are eating for two for twenty years.

And that is if you survive childbed. I dona€™t think we know how ferocious childbed mortality was. 
But we do know that the queens of England were the most cosseted women on the island. And if we 
look from the ascension of the Lancastrian dynasty to the Industrial Revolution, we find 32 queens 
of whom fivea€”Catherine Parr, Jane Seymour, Elizabeth of York, Mary de Bohun, and throw in 
Victoriaa€™ s cousin, the more senior in the succession Crown
Princess and Heir Apparent Charlottea€”died in childbed. That is a 16% childbed mortality rate. 
What was it like for women not so well-situated with respect to nutrition and comfort?

From the nation-and-political point of view, the wealth creation and distribution drove four 
things, of which the first was by far the most important: 1870a€“2010 was the century when the 
United States became a superpower. Second, it was during this period that the world came to be 
composed primarily of nations rather than empires. Third, the economya€™ s center of gravity came 
to consist of large oligopolistic firms ringmastering
value chains. Finally, it made a world in which political orders would be primarily legitimated, at 
least notionally, by elections with universal suffragea€’’rather than the claims of plutocracy, 
tradition, a€cefitness,a€D leadership charisma, or knowledge of a secret key to historical destiny.

Here I may have overstepped: These four were all profoundly influenced by the technology-driven 
explosion of wealth and associated economic repeated creative-destruction revolutions of 1870-2010. 
But were they caused by them? Wouldna€™t some version have happened without the economic-technology 
revolutions? Wouldna€™t a persistent steampunk world have seen analogous processes?

But I dona€™ t think I have overstepped. No Second Industrial Revolution and no full globalization 
means much less global migration to America, much much less of an American midwestern industrial 
powerhouse. I think that means no American exceptionalism. It also means no dominance of the 
economy by oligopolistic global or even national value chains. Full nationalism requires 
near-universal literacy, I think, which comes only in a world no longer under
the harrow of Malthus. Ditto for democracy as the only source of legitimate authority.

Much that our predecessors would have called a€ceutopiana€D has been attained step by step, via 
economic improvements year by year, each of which is marginal, but which compound. Yet, as of 1870, 
such an explosion was not foreseen, or not foreseen by many. Yes, 1770a€“1870 did see, for the 
first time, productive capability begin to outrun population growth and natural resource scarcity. 
By the last quarter of the nineteenth
century, the average inhabitant of a leading economya€”a Briton, a Belgian, a Dutchman, an 
American, a Canadian, or an Australiana€”had perhaps twice the material wealth and standard of 
living of the typical inhabitant of a preindustrial economy.

This passage is part of my argument that the 1770-1870 Industrial Revolution might well have 
beena€”i.e., there is a reasonable counterfactual in which it would have turned out it had 
beena€”merely another albeit very large a€ceefflorescencea€D of a Malthusian economic order. I 
argue that the true breaking of the Malthusian pattern comes only after 1870, with what Robert 
Gordon calls the a€oeone big wavea€D of the Second Industrial Revolution. This is,
to say the least, a very contestable argument. And I am eager to learn more by watching people 
contest it, as they react to my book.

Was that enough to be a true watershed?

"That", here, is attainment in 1870 in the richest countries of living standards and productivity 
levels twice those of Agrarian-Age civilizations. We could have a huge debate on this. Suffice it 
to say here that my view is that that was not enough: that the true watershed was the removal of 
the ensorcelment of the Devil of Malthus; and that that had not been accomplished by 1870 and was 
not clearly in train.

Back in the early 1870s, John Stuart Mill put the finishing touches on the final edition of the 
book that people seeking to understand economics then looked to: Principles of Political Economy, 
with Some of Their Applications to Social Philosophy. His book gave due attention and place to the 
1730a€“1870 era of the British Industrial Revolution. But he looked out on what he saw around him, 
and saw the world still poor and miserable. Far
from lightening humanitya€™ s daily toil, the eraa€™ s technology merely a€oeenabled a greater 
population to live the same life of drudgery and imprisonment, and an increased number of 
manufacturers and others to make fortunes.a€D

I should point out that John Stuart Mill was wrong. It was not just the case that there were more 
rich and richer superrich, and that there was a larger middle class with comforts of various kinds. 
The working classes ofa€! call it the Dover Circle, by which I mean people who lived within 300 
miles of the English port of Dover at the southeast corner of England, plus places that they and 
their descendants settled in large numbers, plus those who strove all their
nerves and muscles to emulate them and did so successfully, had since 1500 grown as rich as the 
middling classes elsewhere. But he was not very wrong: between 1770 and 1870, worldwide, roughly 
5/8 of the increase in humanitya€™ s deployed and diffused technological prowess had gone to 
compensating for increased resource scarcity as the human population explosion began, while 3/8 had 
gone to raise average living standardsa€”and those,
overwhelmingly, had been concentrated inside the Dover Circle (plus offshoots) and there alone.

One word of Milla€™ s stands out to me: a€oeimprisonment.a€n

John Stuart Mill says that as long as the bulk of humanity, the working classes, are under the 
harrow of Malthusa€”as long as they are so poorly nourished as to be 3a€D shorter than their 
upper-class siblings, so poorly nourished that even though their women strive with all nerves and 
muscles to raise surviving sons population growth is only a crawla€”they live a life of 
a€oedrudgerya€D and a€oeimprisonmenta€EI.

Ever since Isaiah Berlin sharpened Benjamin Constanta€™ s distinction between the a€oeliberty of 
the ancientsa€Da€”a liberty of solidarity and agency and purpose, of a€oeMake Rome Great for the 
First Timea€Da€”and the a€oeliberty of the modernsa€Da€”the liberty to march to the beat of a 
different drummera€’’there have been many, usually among the rich and comfortable, who exalt what 
Isaiah Berlin called the negative liberty of being unconstrained
and decry the positive liberty of accomplishing purposes. Here, however, we see John Stuart 
Milla€’’usually claimed as the patron saint of negative libertya€’’eliding this distinction. For 
Mill, if you are locked in a cage, it does not matter whether you stay locked in because there is 
no key or because you cannot afford to buy the key. True liberty, for Mill, has to include agency, 
and thus the social power to command the attention of others so that they assist you in
accomplishing your purposes, for none of us can do anything on our own. The only liberty worth the 
name, for Mill, is a liberty that includes not just individualsa€™ freedom from constraint, but the 
wealth of a rich society, and equitably distributed wealth at that.

Yes, Mill saw a world in 1871 with more and richer plutocrats and a larger middle class. But that, 
for him, was not the main event. He also saw the world of 1871 as not just a world of drudgerya€”a 
world in which humans had to work long and tiring hours. He also saw it not just as a world in 
which most people were close to the edge of being desperately hungry, not just a world of low 
literacya€’’where most could only access the
collective human store of knowledge, ideas, and entertainments partially and slowly.

The world Mill saw was a world in which humanity was imprisoned', in a dungeon, chained and 
fettered.

And Mill saw only one way out: if the government were to take control of human fecundity and 
require child licenses, prohibiting those who could not properly support and educate their children 
from reproducing, only thena€”or was he thinking a€ceifa€D?a€’’would mechanical inventions wreak 
the a€oegreat changes in human destiny, which it is in their nature and in their futurity to 
accomplish.a€D

Mill did not believe that technological progress by itself could ever be fast enough to allow 
humanity to escape from its place beneath the harrow of Malthus. Mill did not believe that human 
couples could ever be far-sighted, collectively rational, and public-spirited enough to limit 
fertility enough to allow escape from the harrow of Malthus. Mill believed that only the statea€™ s 
prohibiting the poorer of the working classes from having children could allow for
the building of a truly human world.

That Mill believed this is an index of how poor humanitya€™ s long-run prospects appeared to be 
back in 1870a€”how incompatible general prosperity was and always would be with important 
dimensions of personal liberty.

And there were others who were much more pessimistic than even Mill. In 1865, then thirty-year-old 
British economist William Stanley Jevons made his reputation by prophesying doom for the British 
economy: it needed to immediately cut back on industrial production in order to economize on scarce 
and increasingly valuable coal.

After the invention of the steam engine, Britaina€™ s coal supply had been elastic up through the 
mid-1800s. The coal was there on the surface, for Goda€™ s sakea€’’glaciers having scraped all the 
rock it had been buried under awaya€”and water for transport to float the coal wherever you wished 
was abundant. In fact, water was too abundanta€”that is why you needed the steam engines to pump 
the water out of the mines. Britain had cumulatively mined 80
million tons of coal as of 1700 when the London price was 30 shillings a ton. Britain had mined 1.1 
billion tons of coal by 1870, and the London price was then 20 shillings a ton.

Figure 1: Real prices in London and cumulative output from the north east


coalfields, 1700s-1860s

40

1700s

30

1860s

20

10


200             400             600             800           1000

Cumulative Output (in. tons)

,<https://gpih.ucdavis .edu/files/Clark Jacks .pdf>

But, Jevons argued chttps://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.224624/page/n 1/mode/1 
up?view=theater>, a€oethe duration of our present cheap supplies of coal cannot help but excite 
deep interest and anxietya€!a€D Jevons claimed that at a depth of 50 feet the temperature of the 
rock being mined was 50F. At 2000 feet it would be 80F. And at 4000 feet it would be 106F. Jevons 
asserted that a€oeif coal were [to be] brought from an average depth of 2000 feet,
our manufactures would have to contend with a doubled pricea€!. [At] 4000 feet, a further great but 
unknown rise in the costa€!. [Thus] the cost of fuel must rise, perhaps within a lifetime, to a 
rate threatening our commercial and manufacturing supremacya€! our present happy progressive 
condition is a thing of limited durationa€!a€D

Jevons was, of course, wrong. The Second Industrial Revolution gave us oil as an alternative power 
source, globalization to economically transport coal from first Wyoming and then other places 
anywhere in the globe, electricity to flexibly apply power where it was useful, and mining 
technologies to overcome all the problems of extraction that Jevons had seen as blockages. But 
simple straight-line extrapolation of trends up to 1865 was what Jevons had done,
and on the assumption that things related to the rate of technological progress were not going to 
change, his extrapolations were not unreasonable.

But, in 1870, things were about to change.

267-270: Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels had in 1848 already seen science and technology as 
Promethean forces that would allow humanity to overthrow its (mythical) old gods and give humanity 
itself the power of a god. Science, technology, and the profit-seeking entrepreneurial business 
class that deployed it had, they said, a€oeduring its rule of scarce one hundred years,... created 
more massive and more colossal productive forces
than have all preceding generations together. Subjection of Naturea€™ s forces to man, machinery, 
application of chemistry to industry and agriculture, steam-navigation, railways, electric 
telegraphs, clearing of whole continents for cultivation, canalisation of rivers, whole populations 
conjured out of the grounda€”what earlier century had even a presentiment that such productive 
forces slumbered in the lap of social labour?a€D

Freddie from Barmen and Charlie from Trier mistook the birth pangs of modern capitalism for its 
death throes; they mistook dawn for high noon. Yes, the business classa€”the French term 
bourgeoisie was the word they ultimately settled ona€”they had, earlier, followed Heinrich Heine is 
using the unfortunate terms a€oethe Jews and the Jew-likea€Da€”had done revolutionary things in the 
century before 1848. Yes, my index of global deployed-and-diffused
technology had grown from 0.62 to 0.91 over 1748-1848; the last previous jump of such proportional 
magnitude had taken from 1500-1748, and the next-to-last from 800 to 1500. Yes, the index of 
deployed-and-diffused technologies in the charmed Dover Circle economies had jumped from 0.78 to 
1.65 over 1748-1848, with the last previous such proportional jump requiring 1150-1748. Yes, 
1770-1848 had seen the globe advance at a rate three times what it had
during the 1500-1770 Imperial-Commercial Age and nine times what it had during the 800-1500 
MediAlval Late Agrarian Age.

But after 1870 technological progress was going to get into serious gear, and amplify itself up by 
another factor of 4.5. Progress that had taken 50 years over 1770-1848 would, afterwards, take 11.

Engels snarked that in overlooking the power of science, technology, and engineering, mere 
economists (such as Mill) had demonstrated that they were little more than the paid hacks of the 
rich.

This is a one-sentence digression^ ”1 probably should have cut it from the main text, and put it in 
a footnote. Engelsa€™ s snarking comes in a piece he wrote in 1843 and a€cepublisheda€d, if that is 
the word, in the Deutsch-FranzA^sische JahrbArcher, a one-issue publication edited by Arnold Ruge 
and Karl Marx. Frederick Engels (1843): Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy 
<https://www.marxists .org/archive/marx/works/1844/df-
jahrbucher/outlines .htm>:

According to the economists, the production costs of a commodity consist of three elements: the 
rent for the piece of land required to produce the raw material; the capital with its profit, and 
the wages for the labour required for production and manufacture. But it becomes immediately 
evident that capital and labour are identical, since the economists themselves confess that capital 
is a€oestored-up labour.a€D We are therefore left with
only two sides a€“ the natural, objective side, land; and the human, subjective side, labour, which 
includes capital and, besides capital, a third factor which the economist does not think about a€“ 
I mean the mental element of invention, of thought, alongside the physical element of sheer labour. 
What has the economist to do with inventiveness? Have not all inventions fallen into his lap 
without any effort on his part? Has one of them cost
him anything? Why then should he bother about them in the calculation of production costs? Land, 
capital and labour are for him the conditions of wealth, and he requires nothing else. Science is 
no concern of his.

What does it matter to him that he has received its gifts through Berthollet, Davy, Liebig, Watt, 
Cartwright, etc. a€“ gifts which have benefited him and his production immeasurably? He does not 
know how to calculate such things; the advances of science go beyond his figures. But in a rational 
order which has gone beyond the division of interests as it is found with the economist, the mental 
element certainly belongs among the elements
of production and will find its place, too, in economics among the costs of production. And here it 
is certainly gratifying to know that the promotion of science also brings its material reward; to 
know that a single achievement of science like James Watta€™ s steam-engine has brought in more for 
the world in the first fifty years of its existence than the world has spent on the promotion of 
science since the beginning of time.

Engelsa€™ s critique of the discipline of economics here is, I think, dead-on. It anticipates that 
of Paul Romer more than 130 years later. The economists, Engels argues, ought to be scientists 
aimed at understanding increasing prosperity a€’’the wealth of nations, as somebody-or-other once 
said. And the key to that is advances in technology: how we expand human control of nature and 
ability to organize ourselves through discovery, development, deployment,
and diffusion of technology. But in Engelsa€™ s daya€”and largely in oursa€”that is not the subject 
of economics. It ignored science and technology. It focused on a government that established 
law-and-order and protected property, and on the extended division of labor mediated through trade 
and the increased stock of productive capital mediated through the thrift and a€oeabstinencea€n of 
the rich as the sources of prosperity. And this makes, Engels argues,
economics as it was practiced in his day (and often in ours) a fake science, of use to the rich and 
the propertied but not to humanity.

I often wonder what works Freddie from Barmen might have produced, had he not fallen under the 
spell of Marx, and decided to devote his life to supporting and then explaining the ideas of his 
genius-friend.

But Marx and Engelsa€™ s promise was not just that there would someday be enough to eat, or enough 
shelter, or enough clothing for the masses, let alone an exponential increase in the value of 
global knowledge, or even a nearly unlimited choice of music to listen to, video to watch, and 
games to play at whim. Slouching, galloping economic growth was but a necessary paroxysm on the way 
to utopia. Their promise was utopia. In
Marxa€™ s few and thin descriptions of life after the socialist revolution, in works such as his 
a€oeCritique of the Gotha Programa€D, the utopian life he foresaw echoeda€’’deliberately, but with 
what authorial intent?a€”the descriptions in the Acts of the Apostles of how people who had 
attained the Kingdom of Heaven behaved: each contributed a€oeaccording to their abilitya€D (Acts 
11:29), and each drew on the common, abundant
store a€oeaccording to their needsa€D (4:35). Perhaps he kept these descriptions rare and without 
detail because, concretely, they differed so little from what Mill envisioned: an end to the 
imprisonment and drudgery of poverty, a society in which all people could be truly free because all 
could have enough.

The a€oeCritique of the Gotha Programmea€n is a very frustrating and allusive texta€”or so I find 
ita€”because Marx is being quite slippery. He is quite clear that the a€oehigher phasea€D of 
communist society is not for today, or for tomorrow, or for us to set out, but rather something 
that will be constructed by the people living in the post-revolutionary world after all echoes of 
the old class society have died away. And he very clearly, via his conscious
allusions to Acts of the Apostles 4:35 and 11:29, identifies the a€oehigher phasea€D with the 
Millennium, with the coming of the New Jerusalem down to earth, and so sets out Marxism as a 
Christian heresya€”the Kingdom of the Heavens to be made present here not by the will of God in the 
future or the preachings of prophets who change peoplea€™ s minds today, but rather by the common 
revolutionary wark of humanity.

The problem is that Marxa€™ s thought eludes us when we try to draw conclusions from his explicit 
use of religiona€™ s imagery for what will be inscribed on humanitya€™ s banners in the a€oehigher 
phasea€D of communist society. For Marx, as we all know, did not like religion as a social 
practice: it was something that distracted humans from working to obtain their real happiness by 
promising them the illusory ghost of happinessa€”it was a€oethe opium
of the peoplea€D.

So is Marx here saying that hopes for a a€oehigher phasea€D of communist society are, inasmuch as 
they veer into religion, also a€oethe opiate of the peoplea€D? That socialists should stick to 
their knittinga€’’revolution, confiscation of the means of production, and thereafter (moderate) 
equalization of the distribution of income to give everybody enough to the extent the productivity 
of society and incentive-compatibility allows? Or is Marx saying that what
religion falsely promises we socialists will delivera€”but just not now, and not in the years 
immediately after the revolution, no more than the bourgeoisie could deliver an industrial 
revolution in the decade after the 1649 execution of King Charles I Stuart?

I can see it going either way. I can see it going a third way too: Marx, old and cranky, painfully 
afflicted with massive infected boils, angry and petulant at what he thought of as his wing of the 
German socialist movement outgrowing his tutelage and making its own decisions about alliances and 
messages.
The text may simply be a temper tantrum, and not something that bears too much weight of 
interpretation.

Economic improvement, attained by slouch or gallop, matters.

While there will be no New Jerusalem descending from the Heavens, and while we will not obtain 
brand-new Resurrection Bodies, at least not in this age of the world, the movement toward something 
we think of as a€ceutopiaa€D mattersa€”even if we have no clue how to actually reach it, or what it 
might be. In the meanwhile, in this age, more wealth is a good thing, for more wealth is power, 
both power to manipulate nature so that we can better accomplish
our purposes, and also power to command the attention of others, so that we can organize them to 
aid us, and they can command our attention to aid them. Economic improvement allows us to bake a 
bigger economic pie, one that comes closer to being big enough. True, there then remain the big 
problems of slicing the pie equitably so that everyone has enough, and then 
tastinga€”enjoyinga€”the pie to make ourselves healthy, safe, secure, and happy. But
without economic improvement, we cannot even talk about solving the problems of slicing and 
tasting. Without economic improvement, the only way for some of us to have enough is if they figure 
out a way to, by force or fraud or both, appropriate large chunks of the work of others. And 
building such an appropriation process carries us far away from the shores of utopia.


How many of us today could usefully find our way around a kitchen of a century ago? Before the 
coming of the electric current and the automatic washing machine, doing the laundry was not an 
annoying, minor chore but instead a major part of the households™ sa€”or rather the households™ s 
womenS™ sS”week. Today few among us are gatherers, or hunters, or farmers. Hunting, gathering, 
farming, along with herding, spinning
and weaving, cleaning, digging, smelting metal, and shaping woodS”indeed, assembling structures by 
handS”have become the occupations of a small and dwindling proportion of humans. And where we do 
have farmers, herdsmen, manufacturing workers, construction workers, and miners, they are 
overwhelmingly controllers of machines and increasingly programmers of robots. They are no longer 
people who manufacture, who make
or shape things with their hands.

As Oded Galor puts it, if you took someone from Jerusalem in the year -800 or 50 or 1500 or 1800, 
and then dropped them in Jerusalem in any one of the other three years, most of what was going on 
would be comprehensible. Take someone from any of those yearsa€”even 1800a€”and drop them in 
Jerusalem today, and most of what wasgoing on would be very strange indeed. In terms of my 
technology index, that  is the differencebetween the 0.16 of the year

-800 or the 0.24 of the year 1 or the 0.43 of 1500 or the 0.7 of 1800 on the one hand, and the 
index value of 25 today. And that shift is not just that we do what we did more efficiently and 
productively by orders of magnitude, but that we do new and very different things than we did.

What do modern people do instead? Increasingly, we push forward the body of technological and 
scientific knowledge. We educate each other. We doctor and nurse each other. We care for our young 
and our old. We entertain each other. We provide other services for each other,so that we can 
alltake advantageof the benefits of specialization. And we engage in complicated symbolic 
interactions that have the emergent effect of
distributing status and power and coordinating the division of labor of todaya€™ s economy that 
encompassed 7 billion people in 2010.

The best thing on this transformation is:

Cosma Shalizi (2013): The Singularity in Our Past Light-Cone: a€~Attention conservation notice: Yet 
another semi-crank pet notion, nursed quietly for many years, now posted in the absence of new 
thoughts because reading The Half-Made World brought it back to mind: The Singularity has happened; 
we call it "the industrial revolution" or "the long nineteenth century". It was over by the close 
of 1918.
Exponential yet basically unpredictable growth of technology, rendering long-term extrapolation 
impossible (even when attempted by geniuses)? Check.

Massive, profoundly dis-orienting transformation in the life of humanity, extending to our ecology, 
mentality and social organization? Check.
Annihilation of the age-old constraints of space and time? Check.

Embrace of the fusion of humanity and machines? Check.

Creation of vast, inhuman distributed systems of information-processing, communication and control, 
"the coldest of all cold monsters"? Check; we call them "the self-regulating market system" and 
"modern bureaucracies" (public or private), and they treat men and women, even those whose minds 
and bodies instantiate them, like straw dogs.

An implacable drive on the part of those networks to expand, to entrain more and more of the world 
within their own sphere? Check. ("Drive" is the best I can do; words like "agenda" or "purpose" are 
too anthropomorphic, and fail to acknowledge the radical novely and strangeness of these 
assemblages, which are not even intelligent, as we experience intelligence, yet ceaselessly 
calculating.)
Why, then, since the Singularity is so plainly, even intrusively, visible in our past, does science 
fiction persist in placing a pale mirage of it in our future? Perhaps: the owl of Minerva flies at 
dusk; and we are in the late afternoon, fitfully dreaming of the half-glimpsed events of the day, 
waiting for the stars to come out.

LINK: <https://web .archive.org/web/20130312071500/http://vserver 1 .cscs 
.Isa.umich.edu/~crshalizi/weblog/699.html>
And do note:

Will McLean: A Commonplace Book: Buying Power of 14th Century Money. In the second half of the 14th 
century, a pound sterling would:

•  Support the lifestyle of a single peasant laborer for half a year, or that of a knight for a 
week.

• Or buy:

o Three changes of clothing for a teenage page (underclothes not included) or

© Twelve pounds of sugar or

© A carthorse or

© Two cows or

© An inexpensive bible or

© Ten ordinary books or

© Rent a craftsmana€™ s townhouse for a year or

© Hire a servant for six months

LINK: <https://willscommonplacebook.blogspot.eom/2008/07/buving-power-of-14th-century-monev.html>

Think of it: A world in which the value of one cup of sugar is one weeka€™ s wages, or the rental 
of a townhouse for two weeks.

My quantitative index of deployed-and-diffused technology sees as great a proportional gap between 
the world of -50000a€”at the start of our last venture unto the wilderness that was out-of-Africa, 
our crossing from the Horn of Africa to Yemen and Sinaia€”and the world of 1500 as between the 
world of 1500 and today (or, alternatively, between today and 1870 on the one hand and 1870 and 
-6000 on the other); those both seem to me to be roughly right.

Over the course of the long century we have crossed a great divide, between what we used to do in 
all of previous human history and what we do now. Utopia, it is true, this is not. I imagine 
Bellamy would be at once impressed and disappointed.

The sheer magnitude of our ability to control nature and organize ourselves productively would 
astonish and impress Edward Bellamy. But the coupling of that with our failure at distribution and 
other modes of utopia building would terrify and disappoint him. It is not that humanity became 
better equipped to handle our world from 1870-2010. We became much better at baking a large-enough 
pie. We made little if any progress on figuring out political-social
institutions for slicing the pie equitably, or for tasting the pie: using our wealth to make 
ourselves healthy, safe, secure, and happy.

The economic historian Richard Easterlin helps explain why. The history of the ends humans pursue, 
he suggests, demonstrates that we are ill suited for utopia. With our increasing wealth, what used 
to be necessities become matters of little concerna€’’perhaps even beneath our notice. But 
conveniences turn into necessities. Luxuries turn into conveniences. And we humans envision and 
then create new luxuries.

Thus we are in a sense on a "hedonic treadmill". If it is happiness or satisfaction that we are 
after, we today, at least in the Global North, at least those of us in the upper middle-class, 
would be better-advised to study the philosophy of Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius than to engage in 
another round of a€oehe who dies with the most toys, winsa€D.

But that does not apply in the earlier days in which the difference between poverty and wealth is 
between seeing your children die because their malnourished immune systems are compromised as 
opposed to having a chance of surviving, between seeing them protein-deprived in utero and hence 
failing to achieve milestones of brain development as opposed to achieving them, between growing up 
stunted at an adult height of 5a€™ 4a€D (for males) as opposed
to 5a€™ 9a€U, or seeing them carried away by as opposed to surviving the famine. In those days, 
Stoicism was not so much a way of making sure you properly oriented yourself to the world, rather 
it was a way of desperately trying to avoid succumbing to despair so that you could act in the 
world at all.

Marcus Aurelius buried eight of his thirteen children.

Easterlin, bemused, puzzled over how a€oematerial concerns in the wealthiest nations today are as 
pressing as ever, and the pursuit of material needs as intense.a€D He saw humanity on a hedonic 
treadmill: a€oeGeneration after generation thinks it needs only another ten or twenty percent more 
income to be perfectly happy.  In the end, the triumph of economic growth is not a triumph of 
humanity over material wants; rather, it is the

triumph of material wants over humanity.a€D We do not use our wealth to overmaster our wants. 
Rather, our wants use our wealth to continue to overmaster us. And this hedonic treadmill is one 
powerful reason why, even when all went very well, we only slouched rather than galloped toward 
utopia.

Now do not overstate the power of this hedonic treadmill: richer people are happiera€”both within 
and across societies, both self-evaluated and by the judgment of others. But they are not that much 
happier. Wealth is the social power to command the attention and effort of others to manipulate 
nature to remove obstacles to your happiness. Whether that is actually effective depends on whether 
you understand what the obstacles are, independence on how many
other obstacles to your happiness you and others generate. The utopian hope was that most of the 
obstacles to happiness came from not having enough wealth, and came from others focusing on taking 
what little you had away from you by force and fraud so that they could have enough. But in a 
market economy what people perceive as enough can rise a€oewithout limita€D, as Aristotle said, if 
you spend too much time focusing on the market. And it turned out
that the utopian hope was vain: having enough by the standards of all previous societies did not 
lead to a humanity in which all were content to sit, every man under his vine and fig tree. There 
was little beating of swords into plowshares. And many make us afraid.

Nevertheless, getting off the treadmill looks grim. Only a fool would wittingly or ignorantly 
slouch or gallop backward to the near-universal dire global poverty that was humanitya€™ s lot 
before 1870.

Therefore do note that I have very, very little tolerance for "degrowth". There is a great deal to 
be said for figuring out what really is enough stuff to live a life not imprisoned by the lack of 
material and social power that is poverty. But, given our failure to equitably slice the economic 
pie, we need a much richer world than we have today if everybody is in fact going to be able to 
clear that bar.

Let me remind you, again, that what follows is a grand narrative. Of a necessity, I spend chapters 
on what others have spent books, indeed multiple volumes, describing. In pursuit of big themes, 
details necessarily suffer. Moreover, I will, as neededa€’’which will be oftena€”a€oepullup the 
rootsa€D and jump far back in time to identify and quickly trace an influential origin story, for 
wecannot do other than think in narrative terms. What
happened in 1500, say, had consequences for what happened in 1900. Details, gray areas, 
controversies, historical uncertainties^’’they suffer, they suffer greatly, but they suffer for a 
purpose. To date, we humans have failed to see the long twentieth century as fundamentallyeconomic 
in its significance^’’and consequently we havefailed to take from it  all the lessons we must. We 
have drawn lessonsaplenty from the myriad political,
military, social, cultural, and diplomatic histories of these decades. But the economic lessons are 
no less pressing, and, in fact, are more pressing.

This passage is an apology for the inadequacies of the book. First of all, we are bearsa€”no, not 
bears, rather we are East African plains apesa€”of very little brain indeed. That means we have a 
very hard time thinking. Without Grand Narratives we cannot think at all. Yet all Grand Narratives 
must, by necessity, be false. I have chosen what I think is the least false grand narrative I can 
think of.
Moreover, even when we are not thinking grand thoughts, we find it impossible to think other than 
in narratives. And we need clear narratives, rather than confused scrumsa€”yet all of reality is 
but confused scrums.

There is one thing I will not apologize for. Overwhelmingly, people have interpreted the long 20th 
century more-or-less as they have interpreted the history of previous centuries. That is a wrong, 
bad thing to do. For previous centuries saw economic and technological change creep forward, inch 
forward, perhaps walk forward at the end, over 1770-1870. But in the long 20th century, 
techno-economic change galloped. And that makes a huge difference in how you
have to think of things.

The source of all, from which all else flows, was the explosion of material wealth that surpassed 
all precedent: the long twentieth century saw those of us who belong to the upper middle class, and 
who live in the industrial core of the world economy, become far richer than the theorists of 
previous centuriesa€™ utopias could imagine. From this explosion flowed five important processes 
and sets of forces that will constitute the major


memes or mis DOOK:

Two sentences to set up a five-item list of major themes for the book that it explores as the 
history of the long 20th century unfolds, and to remind readersa€”yet again: I really am hitting 
them on the head over and overa€”of what made the history of the long 20th century different: the 
value of the stock of human technology discovered, developed, deployed, and diffused throughout the 
global economy grew, after 1870, at a proportional rate of 2.1% per year.
That is 4.5 times the 0.45%/year 1770-1870 rate. That is 14 times the 0.15%/year 1500-1770 rate. 
That is 42 times the 800-1500 0.05%/year rate. That difference, between 2.1 and a small fraction of 
that number, meant that no historical process or causal chain after 1870 was like any century 
beforehand.

The first and preeminent of the five major themes of Slouching Towards Utopia'.

1. History became economic: Because of the explosion of wealth, the long twentieth century was the 
first century ever in which history was predominantly a matter of economics: the economy was the 
dominant arena of events and change, and economic changes were the driving force behind other 
changes, in a way never seen before.

I have already beaten this thematic horse to excess, but let me beat it some more: Before 1870, the 
a€ceeconomica€D was a structure that constrained history, rather than an active player. If you 
wanted to write proper economic history, you had to look across centuries if not millennia before 
you could see sufficient changes for the economya€™ s progress and regress to become a character in 
a meaningful narrative sense. Recall that the first and second volumes

of Fernand Braudela€™ s Civilization and Capitalism <https://archive.orgZdetailsZcivilizationcapiO 
IbrauZmodeZ1 up?view=theater> <https://archive.orgZdetailsZcivilizationcapi0002brauZpageZ10ZmodeZ1 
up?view=theater> are about all the economic things that did not change between 1400 and 
1800a€”about a€oeThe Structures of Everyday Lifea€D and this thing that grows across the centuries 
called mercantile capitalism. Only in the third volume do we get
narrative through the lens of Immanuel Wallersteina€™ s ideas about the importance of a€oeeconomic 
worldsa€D revolving around a dominant corea€”the transformation of the long-distance mercantile 
economy from one that was the economic world of Venice to one that was Amsterdama€™ s economic 
world, and then the takeover of the core role by nation statesa€”as the Imperial-Commercial Age is 
born and develops. Alongside that is a frantic attempt to
survey everything, ending with a despairing cry in the subheading a€oeis any conclusion 
possible?a€D

After 1870, however, the key fact about history in every single generation is that the deployed and 
diffused technologies and thus the economy are profoundly different from what they were the 
generation before, and every single other element of human civilization must deal with the 
consequences for it of that transformation. And then deal again with the next stage of growth in 
the next generation.

The second theme:

2. The world globalized: As had never been the case before, things happening on other continents 
became not just minor fringe factors but among the central determinants of what happened in every 
single place human beings lived.

Thus the history of the world became onea€”very complicated story a€’’rather than largely-separate 
stories with some (occasionally very important) linkages as events and processes originating in one 
region intruded on others. Starting with 1870, and the building out of the global telegraph 
network, plus the laying of rails and the coming of the screw-propellered iron-hulled oceangoing 
steamship, the only kinds of true history one can write are all slices of world
history.

3. The technological cornucopia was the driver: Enabling the enormous increase in material 
wealtha€”its essential prerequisite, in facta€”was the explosion in human technological knowledge. 
This required not just a culture and educational system that created large numbers of scientists 
and engineers, and means of communication and memory, so that they could build on previous 
discoveries, but also a market economy structured in
such a way that it was worth peoplea€™ s while to funnel resources to scientists and engineers so 
that they could do their jobs.

On my morning dog walk today, I heard science-fiction author David Brin chttps:ZZwww.davidbrin,com> 
discourse on how are our civilization is the first one that does not deploy its most numerate and 
literate people to convince others that the existing societal system is just and right as it 
extracts wealth from the people and concentrates it in an upper class of thugs with spears and 
associated grifters. Rather, we deploy our must numerate and literate people to
figure out what is true and then deploy that knowledge to the benefit of the broad public. This 
requires the fiduciary institution of science. This requires the mercenary institution of the 
market economy. And this requires engineering as a profession, as a bridge. And it requires the 
rationalization and routinizationa€”the bureaucratization and systematizationa€”of those 
professional institutions. And it is a matter of scale: two heads are better than one. But it is
much more than that: two heads that can communicate and remember that they stand on the shoulders 
of giants are much better than one. And underneath it all there has to be trust that people will do 
their jobsa€’’the O-ring theory of economic growth <https:ZZwww.jstor.orgZstableZ2118400>a€”and 
enforcement mechanisms to maintain that trust.

4. Governments mismanaged, creating insecurity and dissatisfaction: The governments of the long 
twentieth century had little clue as to how to regulate the un-self-regulating market to maintain 
prosperity, to ensure opportunity, or to produce substantial equality.

I suppose that, in retrospect, it would be extraordinary if governments had not missed managed the 
repeated great transformations that hit the world generation after generation after 1870. Previous 
waves of change had been confined to an element of societiesa€™ superstructures: a new religion, or 
a new dynasty, or a new way about thinking about political obligation, or a new artistic school, or 
maybe the opening up of new trade routes for luxuries, or rarely a
boost in the division of labor. Each of these, it is true, called for careful economic management 
if the system was to hold rather than to degenerate into chaos and at least a local "warre of all 
against alla€D. (At the end of which, it is true, there was a reasonable chance of an at least 
somewhat better system.) Not so after 1870. The big changes were at the base, not in the 
superstructure, and they profoundly transformed how people lived their daily lives every single
generation.

Let me turn the mic over to the wise Dominic Lieven:

Dominic Lieven: The End of Tsarist Russia: The March to World War I & Revolution'. a€~In the two 
generations before 1914, European society as a whole had been transformed more fundamentally than 
in centuries of earlier history. It was hard for anyone to keep his balance amid dramatic economic, 
social, and cultural change; predictions as to where change might lead in the future could inspire 
even greater giddinessa€!
LINK: <https:ZZarchive.orgZdetailsZendoftsaristruss00001iev>

Only truly wise Solons indeed could manage such processes and changes as we hve seen since 1870 
successfully. And we rarely had them. We still do not.

5. Tyrannies intensified: The long twentieth centurya€™ s tyrannies were more brutal and more 
barbaric than those of any previous centurya€”and were, in strange, complicated, and confused ways, 
closely related to the forces that made the explosion of wealth so great.

This is the last, the most depressing, and in many ways the strangest of the major themes of the 
book. We see three members of the thirty-million-dead club in the 1900s: Stalin, Hitler, Mao. Did 
even Chingiz Khan make the mark beforehand? And, overwhelmingly, the slaughter was over economic 
issues: whether the market would or would not play a role in coordinating production and 
distribution, and who would own the farms of Poland and Ukraine. And this
is distinctly odd. Issues of economic organization are not things that a stranger to humanity would 
ever imagine to be the source of slaughter in the tens of millions. And, while a stranger to 
humanity might understand people killing each other over who owns what, they would then feel 
compelled to point out that there are many resources in this world more valuable than the black 
earth soils of eastern Europe.

I write this book to engrave these lessons on our collective memories. The only way I know how is 
to tell you the story, and the sub-stories.

The place to start is in the year 1870, with humanity still ensorcelled, so that better technology 
meant not higher living standards for the typical human, but rather, more people and more resource 
scarcity that ate up nearly all, if not all, of the potential for material human betterment. 
Humanity was then still under the spell of a Devil: the Devil of Thomas Robert Malthus.

And there we are: that is the end of the Introduction to what I have been told is a 
a€cesprawlinga€D and sometimes a a€oemeander[ing] unnecessarilya€D manuscript. But it does have its 
virtues. As my ex-roommate Robert Waldmann writes:
It's a real fun reada€”a page turner with more Herbert Hoover gossip than I imagined possible. The 
reader shall learn things the reader should know and the reader shall enjoy learning thema€!

And:

I remember reading an earlier draft 30 years ago. You haven't wasted the 30 years. This book is 
vastly improved. It is, in my view, an amazing accomplishment^!

I must say that I am very pleased with all of my blurbs.

All I could wish for in my wildest dreams would be that I also had one from a finance-sector 
macher, whose words sell books, and from a Fortune-500 CEO too.

<https: ZZbit .lyZ3pP3Krk>

...in my view, an amazing accomplishment^!" I must say that I am very pleased with all of my 
blurbs. All I could wish for in my wildest dreams would be that I also had one from a 
finance-sector macher, whose words sell books, and from a Fortune-500 CEO too... 826-slouchingZ
l:24PMr™ Jul 9,2022

Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile:.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe


The Full Slouching Tweetstorm <https ://braddelong. substack .com/p/slouching-tweetstorm>

Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the 20th Century". Forthcoming from Basic Books on 
September 6,2022 <https://bit.ly/3pP3Krk>

AN ECONOMIC HISTORY
OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY









OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

J. BRADFORD DELONG

