Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

READING: Libertarianism, Property Rights and Self-Ownership

by JOHN HOLBO on APRIL 15, 2010

OK, Ia€™ m going to try to raise the philosophical tone of this whole libertarian thing. Ita€™ s 
the least I can do. Snarking is a base motive, after all.

Thanks for reading this. And please share it far and wide, if you think it worth reading!
Share

Jacob Levy has earnestly maintained in comments that it is unfair to judge libertarianism by the 
standard of Bryan Caplana€~s attempts to turn the Gilded Age into a Golden Age of ladyfreedom, and 
I would just like to say that, in a sense, Jacob is perfectly correct. Let me make this first point
briefly (because lord knows this post is going to be long enough). Sometimes people distinguish 
a€~thina€™ and a€~thicka€™ . a€~Thina€™ is the kind of a€~propertariana€™ libertarian that Caplan 
cana€™t be because the whole inability to make contracts/own your own property thing is a
straight-up deal-breaker. a€~Thicka€™ is the kind of libertarian Caplan cana€™ t be because of all 
the Mill stuff in my previous post: cana€™ t let society play the tyrant. Ita€™ s perfectly 
reasonable for Jacob to maintain that if you are going to pillory libertarianism, in a theoretical 
sense, you
should pick one or the other of these two sorts a€“ or both. But Caplan is neither, in his 
arguments about womena€™ s freedom under coverture. What is Caplan really? I dunno. I suppose hea€™ 
s a momentarily strayed a€~propertariana€™ , although Ia€™ m happy for him to speak for himself
on this point.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

But Brad DeLong and others fire back that ita€™ s reasonable to hold libertarianism to account for 
the bad company that keeps it. Well, I dunno. I agree that it calls for diagnosis, but you still 
want to keep the theoretical point separate. Maybe that will even help with the diagnosis.

Here goes. I think it is not generally recognized a€“ it seems right to me, correct me if I am 
wrong! a€“ that the thick/thin libertarian distinction, even though it can be fuzzy, in practice, 
marks out two fundamentally distinct kinds of political philosophy, based on totally different 
principles. This
gets disguised because there is considerable overlapping consensus at higher levels; and the thin 
side, in particular, tends to be systematically confused about where it is coming from (where it 
has to be coming from, to be what it is). Once we see this, a few things that are a bit strange 
about
libertarianism, as a sociological phenomenon, look less strange. Also, maybe it turns out that 
libertarianism is a Bigger Tent than liberalism, philosophically, even though it is sometimes 
classed as a mere fringe of the liberal tent. Liberalism really is one kind of thing, broadly 
speaking. But not
libertarianism a€“ which is really two fundamentally different kinds of thing in one. (You could 
debate that, arguing that liberalism, too, has some pretty serious and deep internal divisions. But 
thata€™ s not todaya€™ s topic.)

Leta€™ s start with a paper that was recommended in comments to my last thread. Samuel Freeman, 
a€oellliberal Libertarians: Why Libertarianism is not a Liberal Viewa€D, Philosophy and Public 
Affairs, 30,2 (Spring 2002), 105-151. [Sorry, subscribers only.] Jacob Levy hints in comments
that he doesna€™ t really like it. I can guess why, in part. Even if some forms of libertarianism 
are illiberal, others are perfectly liberal. Ita€™ s a bit annoying, if you are a liberal 
libertarian, that Freeman doesna€™ t acknowledge this. But if we grant this point, and extract what 
is right from
Freemana€™ s analysis, I think we arrive at my point. Freeman argues that libertarianism a€“ the 
illiberal sort a€“ is better classed as a form of feudalism. And thata€™ s right (so long as you 
are careful about what you mean by a€~feudala€™ . More about that in a moment.) So we really need
to  recognize that libertarianism can run the gamut from feudalism to J.S. Milla€™ s On Liberty. 
Thata€™ s really pretty weird.

Now: why would libertarianism be a form of feudalism, of all things? Here I would like to offer an 
argument of my own, which I came up with reading Jan Narvesona€™ s The Libertarian Idea, a couple 
years back, which dovetails with Freemana€™ s argument. He discusses Narveson quite a bit
along the way and has thereby gotten me off my butt, to write out these old thoughts. (Pardon me if 
someone else has already made this argument, or nearly. It seems like the sort of thing that 
someone has probably already tried on for size. I am not a literature hound on this stuff.) 
Libertarians a€“
propertarians, anyway a€“ rather notoriously maintain that you really ought to be able to sell 
yourself into slavery, if you want to. After all, youa€™re your property. You should be able to 
dispose of yourself as you see fit. (Some libertarians dona€™t go so far but many do. Nozick, for 
example.
I    think ita€™ s pretty hard to resist this conclusion, in princpled fashion, once youa€™ ve 
bought the strong self-ownership principle.)

Now: suppose we drop, experimentally, just the libertarian a€~self-ownershipa€™ assumption, while 
keeping the ownership model. Imagine a society in which everyone belongs to their parents, at 
birth. (Or, if their parents belong to someone, to their parentsa€™ owners.) The libertarian logic 
of
this is clear enough, I trust. (I dona€™ t say all libertarians should be bound by logic to embrace 
this vision of utopia on the spot, but they ought to recognize libertarianism, minus assumed 
self-ownership, as a form of the philosophy they advocate, albeit an extreme form.) You didna€™ t 
make
yourself. You are not the sweat of your brow. Someone else made you. And people are the sort of 
things that can be owned. So you are a made-by-someone-else thing. And made to be owned. Why 
shouldna€™t you be born owned by whoever went to the trouble (two someones?)

It would be kind of fun to sketch a hyper-propertarian society, organized along these lines. Ita€™ 
s not obvious how such a society would work. Obviously it could work (or fail to) in a lot of 
different ways. It wouldna€™ t have to turn out radically differently than what wea€™ ve got now. 
Most
parents love their children, so they would free them a€“ officially at birth, or when they turned 
18 or whatever. But it could turn out quite differently, if different social patterns developed. 
You could have your free children and also your slave children, and you might regard them very 
differently.
This utopia doesna€™ t seem likely to shape up as a more free society than the one wea€™ ve got, by 
any ordinary stretch of our ordinary notions of freedom. It wouldna€™ t be terribly surprising if 
it turned out radically a€! feudal. Libertarianism, in this extreme form, could turn out to be the
road to serfdom. But beyond that, it would be quite feudal in the sense that Freeman actually has 
in mind, which is not the serf-sense. He means that political power is privately held. And a bit 
more. Ia€™ 11 just quote Freeman:

Under feudalism, the elements of political authority are powers that are held personally by 
individuals, not by enduring political institutions. These powers are held as a matter of private 
contractual right. Individuals gradually acquire the power to make, apply, and enforce


rules by forging a senes ot private contracts with particular individuals or tamilies. Oaths ot 
tealty or service are sworn in exchange tor similar or compensating benehts. those who exercise 
political power wield it on behalt ot others pursuant to their pnvate contractual

relation and only so long as their contract is in force. Since different services are provided to 
people, there is no notion of a uniform public law that is to be impartially applied to all 
individuals. (148)
In other words:

Libertarianism resembles feudalism in that it establishes political power in a web of bilateral 
individual contracts. Consequently, it has no conception of legitimate public political authority 
nor any place for political society, a a€oebody politica€D that political authority
represents in a fiduciary capacity. (149)

Now, to repeat: this Freeman sense has nothing to do with serfs (hence nothing to do with, say, 
Marxa€™ s view of feudalism as tied up with serfdom.) Freeman emphasizes that feudal Japan, for 
example, fit his a€~web of bilateral individual contractsa€™ feudal model, but they didna€™ t have
a lot of serfs around the place. Nevertheless, when we add a bunch of actual serfs to the 
picturea€”by making everyone be owned by someone else at birtha€”it isna€™t hard to imagine the 
place could start shaping up as really, really feudal. Maybe in a 21st Century sort of way. (Or a 
23rd
Century way.)

But of course libertarians just dona€™t think you should be owned by someone else at birth. But why 
not? Because freedom, thata€™ s why.

But seriously. Suppose an inhabitant of this feudal libertarian utopia objected to not being able 
to own his own children. Because creeping socialism, thata€™ s why! (What will they take away from 
me next?) The government is stepping in and taking property, without compensation, and
redistributing it toa€”well, to the property. And a very undeserving sort of moocher it looks, 
there in its crib. This welfare schemea€’’taking things from owners and giving them to themselves 
a€“ is sure to lead rampant child abuse, typical liberal self-defeating perverse consequences 
idiocy.
(Anyway, why should there even be an agency with the authority to take and redistribute property in 
this extremely expansive and unwarranted fashion?)

Now, to repeat, libertarians dona€™t have to buy this hyper-propertarian scheme, by any means. But 
I think libertarians should admit that it is a libertarian scheme. Ita€™ s roughly half of what 
libertarians believe, plus an argument that the other half is really inconsistent with the half we 
are
keeping, hence ought to be let go.

Leta€™ s get some quotes in here (Ia€™ m getting them out of Freeman, who sees basically the same 
features in these ideas that I am bringing out by my thought-experiment). Jan Narveson: aCceLiberty 
is Property a€! the libertarian thesis is really the thesis that a right to our persons as our
property is the sole fundamental right there isa€D (p. 66). And Murray Rothbard:

In the profoundest sense there are no rights but property rightsa€!. Each individual, as a natural 
fact, is the owner of himself, the ruler of his own person. Then, a€cehumana€D rights of the 
person... are, in effect, each mana€™ s property right in his own being, and from
this property right stems his right to the material goods that he has produced. {Property and 
Market, 238).

Now obviously this is strictly inconsistent with making everyone someone elsea€™ s property (at 
least at the start); but only incidentally inconsistent: just as the question of who owns which 
house or car is hardly essential to the general idea of private property ownership, so the question 
of who
owns which person ought to be separable from the general idea of libertarianism a€“ which is, 
simply, that there are no rights but property rights. And liberty is but one form of (alienable) 
property, albeit a very important form of property.

What Freeman says about this sort of thinga€”the very thing I thought reading Narvesona€”is that it 
turns out that libertarianism isna€™ t about the importance of liberty. Ita€™ s about the nature of 
rights and property.

The response to this would surely run, rather angrily, as follows. Narveson: aCceThe idea of 
libertarianism is to maximize individual freedom by accounting each persona€™ s person as that 
persona€™ s own propertyaCD (p. 175). I am sure that Rothbard and Nozick would chime in with more of
the same. The obvious problem with making everyone belong to their parents, rather than themselves, 
is that you dona€™ t maximize individual freedom that way. Hence the problem with dropping this 
crucial element of libertarianism, then complaining that libertarianism isna€™ t about liberty,
is that of course a philosophy will lack any bit that youa€™ ve gone and carved out of it.

But this is too quick. Thata€™ s a very funny sentence from Narveson I quoted. Compare:
The idea is to maximize individual freedom by locking everyone up.

The idea is to maximize individual freedom by a punch on the nose.

Ok, a bit more seriously:

The idea is to maximize individual freedom by providing a guaranteed minimum income and generous 
social welfare programs from cradle to grave.

And a bit more simply: The idea is to maximize individual freedom.

Now, plausibly, you can do all these things, if you choose. To maximize freedom by locking everyone 
up, I suppose you would try to build the very most open-ish, least restrictive sort of jail you 
could devise. To maximize freedom by punching noses, I guess you would study the ways of the
Batman, or something. What is far from obvious, obviously, is that doing either of these things 
equates to maximizing individual freedom. Period. And the same goes for maximizing individual 
freedom by accounting everyone their own property. You can set out to do this by attempting to 
devise
the most smooth and efficient system for treating everyone as their own property. But it obviously 
doesna€™ t follow that this is the way to maximize individual freedom. Period. Ita€™ s more 
plausible that you will maximize freedom by treating everyone as their own, alienable property than 
by
punching them in the nose, but ita€™ s not self-evident that you can do it either way. Maybe people 
would be more free, on the whole, if you do something else entirely.

So what do libertarians believe?

1. That we should maximize freedom.

2. That we should get the most freedom we can, by treating liberty as property, and everyone as 
their own property (at least at the start).

3. That in fact treating liberty as property, and everyone as their own property, necessarily will 
(or will tend to) maximize freedom.

4. That we should treat liberty as property, and everyone as their own property.

I take it that pretty much all libertarians would like to believe all of 1-4. This is what makes 
them a family. But 3) is not a normative principle of political philosophy so much as a falsifiable 
hypothesis. Suppose therea€™ s a problem with 3 (wea€™re getting there). That will create a split. 
Some
libertarians will stick with 1). Those are the liberal libertarians, the a€~thicka€™ sort, like 
J.S. Mill. Some others, on the other hand, will stick with 4. That is, there are no rights but 
property rights. Liberty is property. And everyone is their own property. This makes for a very 
serious and
fundamental philosophic split down the middle, to put it mildly. Because 4 can be regarded as a 
kind of feudalism + minimum welfare state: everyone is given one lump-sum gubmint handout at 
birtha€’’herself. Feudalism + welfarism is a cheeky formula for thin libertarianism, to be sure. 
But it
brings  out its genuine kinship with other views like: your parents owns you at birth. The king 
owns you at birth. God owns you at birth. The local lord owns you at birth. These 
a€~propertariana€™ variants are but one step from propertarian libertarianism.

Yeah, but that one step is a doozy, freedom-wise. Let me quote Freeman again, quoting libertarians 
advertising their positions.

Libertarians commonly announce their view with such claims as, a€oeThe only relevant consideration 
in political matters is individual libertya€D (Narveson, p. 7); or a€oeLibertarians agree that 
liberty should be prized above all other political valuesa€D (Machan, p. vii);
or a€oeThe idea of libertarianism is to maximize individual freedoma€D [Narveson again]. Nozick, 
more cautiously, makes no such general claim. But he does contend that a€oeliberty upsets 
patternsa€D of distribution (ASU, p. 160), and argues as if anyone with a
proper regard for liberty should see that patterned theories of distributive justice violate a 
commitment to freedom

The question is really what a€~libertya€™ means. That last thought from Nozick is nice, because a 
defender of my hyper-propertarian utopia would no doubt deploy this thought against any socialistic 
scheme to redistribute babies to themselves. This sort of a€~patterned theorya€™ of
distributive justicea€’’everyone gets 4 limbs and a mewl, to have for their very own, at 
birtha€’’violates proper regard for a€~libertya€™ . Everyone owning themselves is a flagrant 
violation of liberty. What sense of a€~libertya€™ is operational here? Freeman:

Libertarians may reply that the enforcement of a persona€™ s rights is not coercive interference 
with othersa€™ lives. a€ceCoerciona€D in their account is not just any use of force but the 
aggressive interference with anothera€™ s rights. People are not coerced when
prevented from actions (such as trespass or theft) they have no right to perform. This moralized 
definition of a€~coerciona€™ may accord with common usage in some cases, but to extend this manner 
of speaking to all cases has peculiar consequences. (124)

Obviously, no one is in favor of someone a€~taking someone elsea€™ s lifea€™ a€”to focus on a 
paradigmatically extreme sort of aggressive violation. But if the life animating your biological 
organism doesna€™ t necessarily belong to you, because it is a piece of alienable property, we
cana€™ t just go assuming the killer wasna€™ t a€~taking his own lifea€™ , i.e. killing a slave 
that properly belonged to him. And libertarians are ok with a€~taking your own lifea€™ , if you 
want to.

And:

What of libertarian declarations that a€oepeople interfere with each othera€™ s liberty as little 
as possiblea€D (Narveson, p. 32)? This declaration cannot mean that libertarians seek to minimize 
the number of interfering actions. It is easy to imagine a libertarian society
without popular support, where the majority of people do not accept (because they cannot afford to) 
its absolute property rules, are prone to forage for their subsistence, and meet with constant and 
regular interference because of legal trespass or theft. The point of
libertarian arguments for minimizing interference is to keep to a minimum, not interfering actions, 
but the kinds of political duties we have, and in particular any enforceable obligations to 
transfer market-acquired holdings to benefit the disadvantaged. (126)

Jim Crow, for example. The social-legal lot of women in the U.S. in the 19th Century is a less 
extreme case, but similarly illustrative.

There is a very brief, oddly Buddhistic way to put this: if liberty means non-frustration of the 
exercise of legitimate property rights, you can be made perfectly free by being completely relieved 
of all property, including your own fife. (Just as Buddhists may say that the route to freedom is 
killing
all your desires, so they cannot be frustrated.) So: not only is slavery in principle acceptable to 
a libertarian (propertarian), the slave remains, technically, completely at liberty, even at the 
moment he is killed with impunity by his master. (His master has no duty to transfer title to the 
market-
acquired slavea€™ s life back to the disadvantaged slave.)

Whatever the merits of this view, it is radically at odds with our ordinary notions of freedom, to 
say the least. (We could dispute what those ordinary notions are, or should be: but a€~slavery is 
freedomaC™ is not among them.) Libertarians are, of course, not interested in maintaining that
a€~slavery is freedomaC™ any more than liberals, buta€”because this is soa€”they really have to 
drop the advertisement that libertarianism (of the propertarian sort) aims at maximizing freedom, 
or minimizing peoplea€™ s interferences with each othersaC™ freedom. It does so only in the
tricksy, Buddhistic sense.


And a bit more simply: The idea is to maximize individual freedom.

Now, plausibly, you can do all these things, if you choose. To maximize freedom by locking everyone 
up, I suppose you would try to build the very most open-ish, least restrictive sort of jail you 
could devise. To maximize freedom by punching noses, I guess you would study the ways of the
Batman, or something. What is far from obvious, obviously, is that doing either of these things 
equates to maximizing individual freedom. Period. And the same goes for maximizing individual 
freedom by accounting everyone their own property. You can set out to do this by attempting to 
devise
the most smooth and efficient system for treating everyone as their own property. But it obviously 
doesna€™ t follow that this is the way to maximize individual freedom. Period. Ita€™ s more 
plausible that you will maximize freedom by treating everyone as their own, alienable property than 
by
punching them in the nose, but ita€™ s not self-evident that you can do it either way. Maybe people 
would be more free, on the whole, if you do something else entirely.

So what do libertarians believe?

1. That we should maximize freedom.

2. That we should get the most freedom we can, by treating liberty as property, and everyone as 
their own property (at least at the start).

3. That in fact treating liberty as property, and everyone as their own property, necessarily will 
(or will tend to) maximize freedom.

4. That we should treat liberty as property, and everyone as their own property.

I take it that pretty much all libertarians would like to believe all of 1-4. This is what makes 
them a family. But 3) is not a normative principle of political philosophy so much as a falsifiable 
hypothesis. Suppose therea€™ s a problem with 3 (wea€™re getting there). That will create a split. 
Some
libertarians will stick with 1). Those are the liberal libertarians, the a€~thicka€™ sort, like 
J.S. Mill. Some others, on the other hand, will stick with 4. That is, there are no rights but 
property rights. Liberty is property. And everyone is their own property. This makes for a very 
serious and
fundamental philosophic split down the middle, to put it mildly. Because 4 can be regarded as a 
kind of feudalism + minimum welfare state: everyone is given one lump-sum gubmint handout at 
birtha€’’herself. Feudalism + welfarism is a cheeky formula for thin libertarianism, to be sure. 
But it
brings  out its genuine kinship with other views like: your parents owns you at birth. The king 
owns you at birth. God owns you at birth. The local lord owns you at birth. These 
a€~propertariana€™ variants are but one step from propertarian libertarianism.

Yeah, but that one step is a doozy, freedom-wise. Let me quote Freeman again, quoting libertarians 
advertising their positions.

Libertarians commonly announce their view with such claims as, a€oeThe only relevant consideration 
in political matters is individual libertya€D (Narveson, p. 7); or a€oeLibertarians agree that 
liberty should be prized above all other political valuesa€D (Machan, p. vii);
or a€oeThe idea of libertarianism is to maximize individual freedoma€D [Narveson again]. Nozick, 
more cautiously, makes no such general claim. But he does contend that a€oeliberty upsets 
patternsa€D of distribution (ASU, p. 160), and argues as if anyone with a
proper regard for liberty should see that patterned theories of distributive justice violate a 
commitment to freedom

The question is really what a€~libertya€™ means. That last thought from Nozick is nice, because a 
defender of my hyper-propertarian utopia would no doubt deploy this thought against any socialistic 
scheme to redistribute babies to themselves. This sort of a€~patterned theorya€™ of
distributive justicea€’’everyone gets 4 limbs and a mewl, to have for their very own, at 
birtha€’’violates proper regard for a€~libertya€™ . Everyone owning themselves is a flagrant 
violation of liberty. What sense of a€~libertya€™ is operational here? Freeman:

Libertarians may reply that the enforcement of a persona€™ s rights is not coercive interference 
with othersa€™ lives. a€ceCoerciona€D in their account is not just any use of force but the 
aggressive interference with anothera€™ s rights. People are not coerced when
prevented from actions (such as trespass or theft) they have no right to perform. This moralized 
definition of a€~coerciona€™ may accord with common usage in some cases, but to extend this manner 
of speaking to all cases has peculiar consequences. (124)

Obviously, no one is in favor of someone a€~taking someone elsea€™ s lifea€™ a€”to focus on a 
paradigmatically extreme sort of aggressive violation. But if the life animating your biological 
organism doesna€™ t necessarily belong to you, because it is a piece of alienable property, we
cana€™ t just go assuming the killer wasna€™ t a€~taking his own lifea€™ , i.e. killing a slave 
that properly belonged to him. And libertarians are ok with a€~taking your own lifea€™ , if you 
want to.

And:

What of libertarian declarations that a€oepeople interfere with each othera€™ s liberty as little 
as possiblea€D (Narveson, p. 32)? This declaration cannot mean that libertarians seek to minimize 
the number of interfering actions. It is easy to imagine a libertarian society
without popular support, where the majority of people do not accept (because they cannot afford to) 
its absolute property rules, are prone to forage for their subsistence, and meet with constant and 
regular interference because of legal trespass or theft. The point of
libertarian arguments for minimizing interference is to keep to a minimum, not interfering actions, 
but the kinds of political duties we have, and in particular any enforceable obligations to 
transfer market-acquired holdings to benefit the disadvantaged. (126)

Jim Crow, for example. The social-legal lot of women in the U.S. in the 19th Century is a less 
extreme case, but similarly illustrative.

There is a very brief, oddly Buddhistic way to put this: if liberty means non-frustration of the 
exercise of legitimate property rights, you can be made perfectly free by being completely relieved 
of all property, including your own fife. (Just as Buddhists may say that the route to freedom is 
killing
all your desires, so they cannot be frustrated.) So: not only is slavery in principle acceptable to 
a libertarian (propertarian), the slave remains, technically, completely at liberty, even at the 
moment he is killed with impunity by his master. (His master has no duty to transfer title to the 
market-
acquired slavea€™ s life back to the disadvantaged slave.)

Whatever the merits of this view, it is radically at odds with our ordinary notions of freedom, to 
say the least. (We could dispute what those ordinary notions are, or should be: but a€~slavery is 
freedomaC™ is not among them.) Libertarians are, of course, not interested in maintaining that
a€~slavery is freedomaC™ any more than liberals, buta€”because this is soa€”they really have to 
drop the advertisement that libertarianism (of the propertarian sort) aims at maximizing freedom, 
or minimizing peoplea€™ s interferences with each othersaC™ freedom. It does so only in the
tricksy, Buddhistic sense.

To review. Why wona€™ t libertarians like my ideal, hyper-propertarian utopia? Because it doesna€™ 
t maximize freedom, thata€™ s why. But it does, in a technical sense. If everyone is a perfect 
slave, infringements of liberty are reduced to zero, by definition. OK, fine. We mean the ordinary
sort of freedom. The sort we actually want. Fine, but now why stop at giving people themselves, and 
nothing else! This might get us only to Jim Crow, or to the lot of women in the 19th Century. 
Thata€™ s not freedom in the ordinary sense. So obviously we need to keep going along this path, if
the goal really is to optimize the supply of liberty, and make sure everyone has essential access 
to that basically equal supply. The hypothesis that you actually will do this just by giving 
everyone self-ownership, and letting the market take ita€™ s course, is empirically implausible. It 
is predictable
that there will be a€~market failuresa€™ , and it is implausible that those failures can never be 
corrected except in self-defeating fashion, i.e. by creating greater loss of liberty on some other 
front. It just isna€™t that hard to end Jim Crow without accidentally enslaving the white people, 
as an
unintended consequence. So if a€~society is playing the tyrantaC™ , in Millsa€™ sense, and you a€“ 
a libertarian a€“ dona€™ t feel obliged to do anything about it, you are giving up on the ideal of 
freedom, except in this highly technical sense that really doesna€™ t have much appeal. Slavery
can   be freedom.

Turning this point around: if libertarians stick to their a€~thina€™ guns they are sticking with 
feudalism + minimum welfare state and letting go of any ideal of liberty, in any ordinary sense. 
There is no other philosophical reason to stick with that position. (More realistically, you are 
elaborately
apologizing for the status quo.) On the other hand, if libertarians stick with the ideal of 
maximizing (optimizing) the stock of freedoma€’’making sure there is as much of the stuff as is 
consistent with everyone having that amount of ita€”then you are like Will Wilkinson or Jacob Levy. 
Namely,
you   have no fundamental philosophical disagreements with a great many liberals, only an 
instrumental, policy dispute over the best means of achieving what is basically a liberal end. You 
find yourself in the position of agreeing with a€~thina€™ libertarians about a lot of policy 
questions,
because you think that 3) is often basically true, even though it isna€™ t some sort of conceptual 
truth or absolute normative principle. You think liberals are perversely obstinate about resisting 
market solutions; but you are philosophically at odds with a€~thina€™ libertarianism because you are
in favor of liberty, whereas at bottom those others have this funny sort of feudalism + welfare 
thing going on. Which they are concealing under screwy usage of words like a€~libertya€™ and 
a€~coercea€™ that pretends to be no-nonsense usage.

Let me finish with a final note about the case of Bryan Caplan. I honestly feel a bit bad about 
having snarked at him so severely because, after I did that, I remembered that I have actually met 
him. (Hey, he doesna€™t look anything like that picture up on EconLog.) And he seemed perfectly
friendly and nice, and we got along fine, which causes me to feel irrationally remorseful for my 
high-handed mockery. Which doesna€™ t make a bit of sense, because either snarking is ok or it 
isna€™ t. And I dona€™ t retract a word of my complaint, philosophically. But I think we can see the
source of his error, possibly, in light of my brilliant analysis. Caplan is, I am pretty sure, a 
a€~thina€™ libertarian. Self-ownership and the market and non-aggression and no fraud. The minimum 
libertarian package. He has this idea that men, in the 19th Century, in the US, were closer to his
libertarian ideal than men today. Because less government and lower taxes, pretty much. He has been 
trying to make out functionally, if not strictly legally, the lot of women was not so much worse 
than that of men. Conclusion: women back then still better off, libertarian-wise, than women
today.  This isna€™ t plausible, for all the tons of reasons that have been piled on, and you 
arena€™ t really allowed to reason this way anyway, as a libertarian. As Jacob keeps begging him to 
admit. But the really simple problem here, which is leading to so much bafflement on the part of
spectators, is that Caplan is measuring freedom in such a narrowly libertarian way. Liberty is not 
being interfered with, if the exercise of your legitimate property rights is not interfered with. 
But by that standard, not only might married women in the 19th Century qualify (if we accept the 
a€~put
your  foot downa€™ and force your husband to do it form of argument); but, actually, 
African-Americans under Jim Crow would quality. And indeed, African-Americans in slavery might 
qualify, if it had only been the case that their sales had been on the up-and-up, libertarian-wise 
(which they
clearly werena€™ t). That is, you cana€™ t tell that there is any lack of freedom, just by looking 
at the pre-Civil War South, and noticing there are lots of slaves. You have to ask: how did they 
get this way? Since Kaplan is not looking at how women in the 19th Century got into the general 
social
state they were in, he is hardly going to conclude that there is anything necessarily a€~unfreea€™ 
about that state. Unless there are high taxes in it.

In short, everyone is looking at the screamingly feudal results and saying: how the hell does this 
look like liberty^. And the answer is: Caplan is a libertarian, so of course it can look strangely 
feudal. Thata€™ s because it can be completely feudal. Jacob Levy and Will Wilkinson are pained by 
this,
because, though they too are libertarians, the principles that they are working froma€’’optimize 
the supply of liberty (in something like the ordinary sense)a€”are radically incommensurable with 
the principles that have to be behind Caplana€™ s philosophy. And I am sure Caplan would deny

this, but I dona€™ t think he can, in good philosophical conscience.

UPDATE: therea€™ s a kind of thin/thick liberalism/propertarianism parallel that runs through the 
post, by implication, that doesna€™ t fully hold, on reflection.
LINK: <https://crookedtimber.org/2010/04/15/libertarianism-property-rights-and-self-ownership/>

Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Give a gift subscription


Type your emaila€]       Subscribe

Give a gift subscription

