I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

Surely there are other features of the history of economic growth that are worth noting, aside from 
this grand watershed boundary crossing that is the coming of Modern Economic Growth, and the escape 
of humanity from ensorcellment by the devil of Malthus?

Yes! I count a number of things:

1. The Watershed-Boundary Crossing of the Neolithic Revolution from -8000 to -6000: the invention 
of agriculture (and herding).

2. The  glacial pace of technological progress in the pasta€”that over 1870 to 2010 we saw, in an 
average year, 200 times the proportional technological progress of the early Agrarian Age. (And, of 
course, growth    from a much, much higher pace.)

3. Nevertheless, the large cumulative magnitude of technological progress in the past: as much from 
-6000 to 1870 as from 1870-2010.

4. The  acceleration of growth in the early Agrarian Age -6000 to the year 1: literacy matters for 
making humanity an anthology intelligence composed not just of those alive today but also of the 
dead, and two heads are better than one for solving problems.

5. The Late-Antiquity Pause from 1 (actually 150) to 800a€”I at least would have expected another 
doubling of the rate of progress after the year 1, which would have carried H up to 0.65 by 800 and 
then possibly    put the world at the  cusp of the IndustrialRevolution, but we did not attain that 
level of H un
1770.

6. The MediAIval Recovery of technological progress to something like its pre-pause norm (but with 
the year 800 seeing five times the human population of the year -1000, why wasna€™ t there faster 
growth in H than in the -1st millennium?).

7. The Watershed-Boundary Crossing of the Imperial-Commercial Age step-up in growth over 1500 to 
1770.

8. The Watershed-Boundary Crossing of the British Industrial Revolution Age from 1770 to 1870.

9. As noted already, at great length, the Huge Watershed-Boundary Crossing of the Modern Economic 
Growth from 1870 to 2010.

10. The Population Explosion and Demographic Transition from 1770 to 2100.

11. Whatever is going on nowa€”if global warming and other problems do not interrupt Modern 
Economic Growth, what do we have to look forward to for the world of 2100?

Global Longest-Run Global Economic Growth


Date

Ideas
Growth
Rate      h

Ideas
Stock
Level      H

Real     Popula- Total
Income/ tion P Income Y
Capita y (millions) (billions)


-73000

-68000

-48000

-8000

-6000

0.002%

0.003%

0.009%

0.008

0.011

0.036

0.043

$1,200

$1,200

$1,200

$1,200

$900

0.005

0.2

2

5

$0.12

$0.24

-3000 0.018%        0.074          $900        15        $14



-3000 0.018%        0.074

-1000 0.030%        0.136

$900        15

$900        50

$14

$45

150 0.060%        0.272          $900       200       $180

800 0.014%        0.297          $900       240       $216

1500 0.052%        0.429          $900       500       $450


1770 0.149%       0.643

1870 0.442%       1.000

$1,100

$1,300

750

1300

$825

$1,690

2010 2.159%       20.557       $11,600      6900     $80,040

2100 2.000%      108.893        $53,802      9000    $484,214

