Condition: OMICRON

Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support 
my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

First: South African Omicron Mortality 0.3% vs. Delta 2%

Yes, the South African population had more acquired immunity vis-A -vis against Omicron than it had 
had against Delta earlier, but so do we, and so does everybody else. And it now looks like Omicron 
mortality was 0.3% of reported cases, compared to Delta and earlier mortality of 2% of reported 
cases:

New cases and deaths

From JHU CSSE COVID-19 Data • Last updated: 2 days ago

New cases ▼     £ South Africa ▼        All time ▼


30,000

Dec 31, 2021

New cases: 11,754

7-day avg: 9,311

20,000

10,000

Jun 15 Sep 17 Dec 20 Mar 24 Jun 26 Sep 28 Dec 31

New cases — 7-day average

s' New cases and deaths

From JHU CSSE COVID-19 Data Last updated: 2 days ago


ueains ▼     ► j- souin Ainca ▼       AH nme ▼


800

600

400

200

Dec 31, 2021

Deaths: 84

7-day avg: 57

Influenza in the United States hits 20 million people a year, and kills 20,000a€”an 0.1% mortality 
rate. Omicron in the United States looks now to be a measles-contagious triple flu. If it hits 
100,000,000 people, that is still 300,000 more deaths. But it is so much better than it might have 
been.
On the other hand, effectively hunkering down for a month is really, really difficult for American 
society, given how contagious it has turned out to be. California looks to have a very bad next 
month, as far as case numbers are concerned:

New confirmed cases of Covid-19 in New York, Florida, Texas and California

Seven-day rolling average of new cases (per 100k)

• New York

280

260

240

220

200                                                                                                 
 • Florida

180

160

140


120

100

80

60

40

20

0

Jan 1 Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep Nov

2020                                              2021

Source: Financial Times analysis of data from the Johns Hopkins CSSE.

Data updated January 2 2022 11.14am GMT. Interactive version: ft.com/covidl9

South Africa Omicron was up-and-down in a month, but the past two years have taught us that 
epidemic waves follow very different trajectories in different countries, for reasons that I at 
least do not understands’’complicated by the fact that reported case numbers are garbage, and 
hospitalizations and deaths are reported with too long a lag to be useful for assessment and 
planning in the
moment:

New confirmed cases of Covid-19 in European Union, US, South Africa and UK

Seven-day rolling average of new cases (per 100k)



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Picture:

Ready to record remote lectures () for Spring 2022:


Very Briefly Noted:

•  David Lindsay Roberts: How the US census Led to the First Data Processing Company 125 Years Ago: 
a€~The founding of the first automated data processing company, the Tabulating Machine Company, 125 
years ago on December 3,1896a€ 1 
<https://arstechnica.com/science/2022/01/how-the-us-census-led-to-the-first-data-processing-company-
125-years-ago/>

•  Rana Foroohar: Why We Should Expect Wobbling in Global Inflation Dynamics: a€~Modelling on data 
of past 50 years may be hard with a a€~bullwhipa€™ economya€! 
<https://www.ft.com/content/9444643e-9d43-4e5f-92d8-78c64c9414db>

•  Wikipedia: Khoisan: a€~The populations ancestrala€! [were] the a€oelargest human 
populationa€Da€! from their early separation before 150 kya until the recent peopling of Eurasia 
some 70 kyaa€! dispersed throughout much of southern and southeastern Africaa€! 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khoisan#Origins>

•  Philippe Lemoine: Have We Been Thinking about the Pandemic Wrong?: a€~[With] quasi-homogeneous 
mixing populations that are internally well-connected but only loosely connected to each other, the 
effective reproduction number can undergo large fluctuations even in the absence of behavioral 
changesa€l <https://cspicenter.org/blog/waronscience/have-we-been-thinking-
about-the-pandemic-wrong-the-effect-of-population-structure-on-transmission/>

•  Duncan Black: Eschaton: Good Boys and Good Girls: a€~Flashbacks to the Obama administration^!. 
Righteous certainty among people who succeeded because they knew who to check all the right boxes 
when they were 15a€!. Not a lot of self-doubt, not a lot of self-recrimination. Among other things, 
ita€™ s a worldview which is very unsympathetic to the failure of othersa€!

<https://www.eschatonblog.com/2021/12/good-boys-and-good-girls.html>

•  Kristen V. Brown: Can Omicron Escape Vaccines & Boosters?: a€~The vaccines still appear to be 
doing their most important joba€!. Omicron is very good at getting past a vaccinea€™ s first line 
of defense, antibodiesa€!. [But] omicron is still easily defeated by a vaccinea€™ s second line of 
defense, T cells and B cellsa€! <https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-01-
02/can-omicron-escape-vaccines-and-boosters>

• Dhruve Merota: D.C. Police Tried To Fire 24 Current Officers For d€ "Criminal Offenses.a€™ A 
Powerful Panel Blocked Nearly Every One, Documents Show a€ “ DCist: a€~D.C. Police Tried To Fire 24 
Current Officers For a€~Criminal Offenses.a€™ A Powerful Panel Blocked Nearly Every One, Documents 
Showa€! <https://deist.com/story/21/12/18/dc-police-panel-blocked-
mpd-firings/>

•  Arian Campo-Flores & Scott Calvert: Surfside, Fla., Condo Collapse: From Glimmering Beaches to 
Ruin: a€~Champlain Towers Southa€™ s deterioration over decades led to one of the deadliest 
building failures in U.S. historya€! 
<https://www.wsi.com/articles/surfside-fla-condo-collapse-from-glimmering-beaches-to-ruin-1164077380
4>

• Ursina Schaede: a€™ Finland had a quota that reserved 40% of study slots to become a primary 
school teacher for male applicantsa€!

Ursina Schaede @urs schaede

Finland had a quota that reserved 40% of study slots to become a primary school teacher for male 
applicants. The first hurdle to pass in admissions was primarily based on test scores. Male 
teachersa€™ scores were on average much lower than those of female teachers:

Figure 2: Matriculation exam percentile rank among primary school teachers by year of last
matriculation exam

A Men • Women

1975            1980            1985            1990            1995

Last exam year

2:30 PM a~™ Dec 31.2021

• Angela Rasmussen: a€™ What is it about cryptocurrency that convinces enthusiasts they are 
uniquely qualified to correct experts in other fields? Seriously 10/10 randos declaring that I need 
to Google virology have laser eyes, incessantly post about ethereum or whatever, & ooze palpable 
insecuritya€!


Dr. Angela Rasmussen @angie rasmussen

What is it about cryptocurrency that convinces enthusiasts they are uniquely qualified to correct 
experts in other fields? Seriously 10/10 randos declaring that I need to Google virology have laser 
eyes, incessantly post about ethereum or whatever, & ooze palpable insecurity.
2:53 PM r™ Jan 2,2022

198Likes23Retweets

• Peter Hotez: a€™Not a question of being scared. Ia€™ m not frighteneda€!Ia€™ m horrified. Since 
June 2021: 200,000 unvaccinated Americans lost their lives due to COVID despite widespread 
availability of vaccines. 200,000 Americans needlessly died because they believed disinformation 
from the far rightaC!

Prof Peter Hotez MD PhD @PeterHotez

Not a question of being scared. I'm not frightened...I'm horrified. Since June 2021: 200,000 
unvaccinated Americans lost their lives due to COVID despite widespread availability of vaccines. 
200,000 Americans needlessly died because they believed disinformation from the far right

Cloud Benders @BendersCloud

@PeterHotez The people who are closed to any debate are the perpetrators of "anti-science." If 
these skeptics are so wrong, and so lacking in evidence and proof, why is everyone so scared of 
them? You don't ban, deplatform and revoke licenses of people you are not scared of.
2:57 PM a~™ Jan 2,2022

479Likes 107Re tweets

Paragraphs:

Uri: A Recap of [Neal Postmana€™ s] a€ceAmusing Ourselves To Deatha€d a€~The real model for our 
present is not Orwella€™ s 1984 (1949) but Aldous Huxleya€™ s Brave New World (1932). a€oeWhat 
Orwell feared was those who would ban books; what Huxley feared was that there would be no reason 
to ban a book, for there would be no-one who wanted to read onea€!. Orwell
feared that the truth would be concealed from us; Huxley feared the truth would be drowned in a sea 
of irrelevance.a€D As Huxley later wrote: aCceThe civil libertarians and rationalists who are ever 
on the alert to oppose tyranny fail to take into account mana€™ s almost infinite appetite for 
distractions. In 1984, people are controlled by inflicting pain; in Brave New World, by inflicting
pleasurea€Da€!

LINK: <https://www.atvbt.com/amusing-ourselves-to-death-neil-postman/>

Jordana Cepelewicz: Mental Phenomena Dona€™ t Map Into the Brain as Expected'. a€~Poldrack agreed. 
a€oel dona€™ t think any of us would want to tell people: Dona€™ t use the word a€~memorya€™ 
anymore,a€D he said. But to understand the brain, we might need to challenge our intuitions about 
how it worksa€!. Another important consideration is how meaningful a new
framework might end up being. a€oeYou may gain in terms of knowledge, but you may actually stop 
understanding y ourself ,a€D Krakauer saida€!

LINK: <https://www.quantamagazine 
.org/mental-phenomena-dont-map-into-the-brain-as-expected-20210824/>

W. Amos & J. I. Hoffman (2009): Evidence that Two Main Bottleneck Events Shaped Modern Human 
Genetic Diversity. a€~Analysing a large published dataset of 783 microsatellite loci genotyped in 
53 worldwide populationsa€!. Immediately following a sharp population decline, rare alleles are 
lost faster than heterozygosity, creating a transient excess of heterozygosity relative to allele
numberaC!. We find evidence of two primary events, one a€~out of AfricaaC™ and one placed around 
the Bering Strait, where an ancient land bridge allowed passage into the Americas. These findings 
agree well with the regions of the world where the largest founder events might have been expected, 
but contrast with the apparently smooth gradient of variability that is revealed when current
heterozygosity is plotted against distance from Africaa€!

LINK: <https://www.ncbi .nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2842629/pdf/rspb20091473 .pdf>

TV Tropes: Filibuster Freefall'. a€~Art tends to draw fringe personalities. Be they left-wing or 
right-wing, sexually liberated or restrictive, bearing funny ideas on everything from drugs to 
health care to the wearing of funny hats on Sundays, creative types usually have their ideas and 
stick to them. Usually, however, they manage to stay separate from the work, or if theya€™re worked 
in,
theya€™re blended in a way that adds to the quality of the work or at least doesna€™t detract from 
the main thrill ride. There are some cases, however, where a strange combination of the authora€™ s 
prestige, personal life, and political bent causes things to take a strong shift. Suddenly, 
youa€™re cracking open the latest book in a rollicking fantasy series and therea€™ s a hundred page
section                                                                                             
                                                                                       on how 
people wearing funny hats on Sunday should be sentenced to death by firing squad. Where once there 
was flirting, things have gotten overtly lewd and even hideously porny. Where once there was fun 
military action, there are now long sections on the moral failings of the Clinton administration. 
Something has cracked, and the author has ended up firmly in Filibuster Freefalla€!

LINK: <https://tvtropes .org/pmwiki/pmwiki .php/Main/FilibusterFreefall>

Adam Gurri: The Case Not Made: A Response to Anne Applebaumd€™ s a€ceThe New Puritansa€\3 a€~Many 
of [Anne Applebauma€™ s] specific claims rest upon even weaker reeds than this. In one case she 
tells readers that a€oeAt least two of the people I interviewed believe that they were punished 
because a white, male boss felt he had to publicly sacrifice another white man in order to
protect his own position,a€D as though anonymously speculating that the white mana€™ s guilt of 
their bosses was the cause of their unspecified misfortune constitutes any kind of credible 
evidence of the truth of those speculations. In another she quotes a different anonymous professor 
who a€oethought that one of his colleagues resented having to work with him.a€D In a third she 
mentions
that Yale Law professor Amy Chua a€oebelieves that investigations into her relationships with 
students were sparked by her personal connections to Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugha€Da€!

LINK: 
<https://www.liberalcurrents.com/the-case-not-made-a-response-to-anne-applebaums-the-new-puritans/>
Leave a comment

Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support 
my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:



EARLY DRAFT: PROJECT SYNDICATE: The Lack of Vision

Not satisfied with this yet, but it is the drop-dead date for this, if I am going to get it into 
the stream. So working awaya€!

Read more

a year ago A- Brad DeLong

