Share

Very Briefly Noted:

• Wikipedia: Venona Project <https ://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venona_proiect>

• Wikipedia: Agent of Influence <https: //en .wikipedia .org/wiki/Agentof_influence>

• Matthew Yglesias: a€™ Conservatives would have an easier time defending the American tradition 
from over-zealous reformers were they not simultaneously committed to defending the legacy of 
traitors:
Christopher Caldwell: There Goes Robert E. Lee: His eclipse in American lifea€! 
<https://twitter.com/mattyglesias/status/1401325972712984582>

•  Jerome Taylor: a€™ Powerful combo picture has just hit the @AFP wire. Shows Tiananmen 
anniversary vigils in Hong Konga€™ s Victoria Park in 1990,1999,2004,2011,2015,2018,2019,2020 anda€!
tonight <https://t,co/Gf3Fpwtmdt>a€! <https://twitter.com/JeromeTaylor/status/1400791730685845511>

• Wikipedia: Computational Social Science


snare

Very Briefly Noted:

• Wikipedia: Venona Project <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venona project>

• Wikipedia: Agent of Influence <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agentof influence>

• Matthew Yglesias: a€™ Conservatives would have an easier time defending the American tradition 
from over-zealous reformers were they not simultaneously committed to defending the legacy of 
traitors:
Christopher Caldwell: There Goes Robert E. Lee: His eclipse in American lifea€! 
<https://twitter.com/mattyglesias/status/1401325972712984582>

•  Jerome Taylor: a€™ Powerful combo picture has just hit the @AFP wire. Shows Tiananmen 
anniversary vigils in Hong Konga€™ s Victoria Park in 1990,1999,2004,2011,2015,2018,2019,2020 anda€!
tonight <https://t,co/Gf3Fp wtmdt>a€! <https://twitter.com/JeromeTaylor/status/140079173Q685845511>

• Wikipedia: Computational Social Science

<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computational social 
science#:~:text=Computational%20social%20science%20refers%20to,simulate%2C%20and%20analyze%20social%
20phenomena>

• Robert S. Wang: Countering Chinaa€™ s Intimidation of Taiwan 
<https://www.afsa.org/countering-chinas-intimidation-taiwan>

• Gabriel Zucman: a€™ Ok what, exactly, is this global deal on corporate taxation about? The most 
important component is the minimum tax of 15%. This does NOT mean that all countries must increase
their corporate tax rate to 15%. It means that multinational profits will be subject to a 15% 
minimum effective ratea€! <https://twitter.com/gabriel zucman/status/1401193407742189572>

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Paragraphs:

The shift of macroeconomics to a€oeRBC modelsa€Da€”and the fact that a good and very vocal 1/3 of 
the economics profession went the full Herbert Hoover during the Great Recession of 
2008-2010a€”should make every
economist in the world hideously embarrassed for the profession, and should have made all of us 
spend a great deal of time apologizing to Queen Elizabeth II Windsor, to the unnecessarily 
unemployed over 2008-2018, and to
the world at large that their misinformation did much to pointlessly impoverish. Paul Krugman has a 
theory about why this happened, with which I think I agree:

Paul Krugman (2010): The Instability of Moderation'. a€~We used to pity our grandfathers, who 
lacked both the knowledge and the compassion to fight the Great Depression effectively; now we see
ourselves repeating all the old mistakesa€!. The kind of moderate economic policy regime Brad and I 
both supporta€”a regime that by and large lets markets work, but in which the government is
ready both to rein in excesses and fight slumpsa€”is inherently unstable .a€! Minsky-type financial 
instabilityaCI [plus] intellectual and political instability a€! one must count on the government to
ensure more or less full employment; only once that can be taken as given do the usual virtues of 
free markets come to the fore. Ita€™ sa€! deeply reasonablea€! buta€! also intellectually

unstablea€!. You assume rational individuals and rapidly clearing marketsa€! [except in] macro 
[where] frictions and ad hoc behavioral assumptions are essential. So what? Inconsistency in the
pursuit of useful guidance is no vice. The map is not the territory, and ita€™ s OK to use 
different kinds of maps depending on what youa€™re trying to accomplish^!. Buta€! given human
propensities, plus the law of diminishing disciples, it was probably inevitable that a substantial 
part of the economics profession would simply assume away the realities of the business cycle, 
because
they didna€™ t fit the models. The result was what Ia€™ ve called the Dark Age of macroeconomics, 
in which large numbers of economists literally knew nothingaC!. Conservatives have always
tended to view the assertion that government has any useful role in the economy as the thin edge of 
a socialist wedgea€! William Buckleya€! one of his key complaints was that the Yale faculty
taughta€’’horrors!a€’’Keynesian economicsa€!. Last but not least, the very success of 
central-bank-led stabilization, combined with financial deregulationa€’’itself a by-product of the 
revival of free-
market  fundamentalisma€”set the stage for a crisis too big for the central bankers to handle. This 
is Minskyism: the long period of relative stability led to greater risk-taking, greater leverage, 
and,
finally,  a huge deleveraging shock. And Milton Friedman was wrong: in the face of a really big 
shock, which pushes the economy into a liquidity trap, the central bank cana€™ t prevent a
depressiona€!. The era of the Samuelsonian synthesis was, I fear, doomed to come to a nasty end. 
And the result is the wreckage we see all around usa€!

LINK: <https://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/ll/26/the-instability-of-moderation/>

I am afraid it is a€ceManchin and Sinema need to focus on passing at least one more big 
reconciliation billa€D. How to get them to do so is above my pay grade:

Noah Smith: Time to Temper My Optimism?'. a€~How do we get the optimism train back on track?a€! The 
main obstacle isa€’’surprise!a€’’partisanship. A chunk of Republicans are refusing
vaccines, and the Senate GOP is blocking most legislation. Biden needs to give up on the dream of 
bipartisanship earlier than Obama did, and focus all his efforts on passing at least one more big
reconciliation bill. The science funding that was stripped out of the Endless Frontier Act, in 
particular, needs to be fully restored and even increased. Meanwhile, states need to use every 
trick in the
book    to increase vaccination rates. Ia€™ m still optimistic about where America is headed. But 
especially when it comes to government investment, my sunny outlook has been a bit tempered in the
last montha€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/time-to-temper-my-optimism>

The thing is that Republicans today do not want a franchise restricted to the knowledgeable and 
successful, but rather one restricted to their supporters. It is a fascist rather than an elitist 
movement:

Josh Ganz: Are Republicans Still Democrats? : a€~Harry Jaffa, an admirer of Lincoln, an avowed 
political egalitarian, and a fierce opponent of Kendall. Yet his disciples at the Claremont 
Institute, a
cadre which forms the hard-core of intellectual Trumpism, also find themselves constantly having to 
re-imagine and re-engineer the make-up of American politya€!. Michael Antona€™ s
infamousa€! a€oeThe Flight 93 Election,a€D bemoaned the growing impurity of the electorate: 
a€oea€!the ceaseless importation of Third World foreigners with no tradition of, taste for, or
experience in liberty.a€!a€D Keep in mind that this fellow actually served as a national security 
official in the Trump administration. Antona€™ s practical solution to the problem of the bad
electorate: basically dissolve it and elect anothera€!. Anton called for a Trump executive order to 
strip millions of people of the birthright citizenshipa€!. [Since the] late a€™ 80s and early 
a€™90s,
conservative hostility to democracy is clearly manifest. Leta€™ s look briefly at the columns of 
cronies Pat Buchanan (syndicated columnist and presidential candidate,) Sam Francis (Washington
Times opinion editor), and Joe Sobran (National Review senior editor and syndicated columnist)a€!

LINK: <https://iohnganz.substack.eom/p/are-republicans-still-democrats>

No. Neither Harry Dexter White, Solomon Adler, Frank Coe, or William Ullman were witting, 
enthusiastic spies for the NKVD or the GRU at the U.S. Treasury Department during WWII. Any more 
questions?:

Vitaly Pavlov (1942): Orientation on NKVD Activiies in Washington D.C:. a€~The situation with 
cultivating the Ministry of Treasury looks better. The group of a€oePala€D [Nathan Gregory
Silvermaster] which includes a€oeJurista€D [Harry Dexter White], a€ceSaksa€D [Solomon Adler], 
a€cePika€D [Frank Coe], and a€oePoloa€D [William Ullman] is at present the most efficient
among  the agent network we possess. However, at present only a€oePala€D is our agent, all the rest 
are used by us blind. In early March of the current year, we received a reporta€! of great
interesta€!. Our task is [to make] maximum use of them at present, and to shift them gradually 
completely into our channela€!. In the wartime situation, the work of the War Production Board
assumes great importance. To know in advance the production plans, manufacturing and shipment 
terms; to know all the functioning leverages of this complicated capitalist machinea€!

LINK: <http://documentstalk.eom/wp/vassilievs-notes-on-pavlov-orientation-a-comparison/# ftn6>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

