
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  John F. Kennedy (1960): d€oeThe New Frontierd€m Liberal Party Nomination Acceptance Speech 
<https://www.jfklibrary.org/archives/other-resources/john-f-kennedy-speeches/liberal-partv-nominatio
n-nyc-
19600914>

• William H. Kilpatrick & al. (1933): The Educational Frontier 
<https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/705648?journalCode=schools>

• Perry Miller (1956): Errand into the 
WzZJerne55<https://www.google.com/books/edition/Errand_Into_the_Wilderness/oKfCbW3BlxkC>

•  Mancur Olson (1982): The Rise & Decline of Nations: Economic Growth, Stagflation, & Social 
Rigidities <https://www.google.com/books/edition/The_Rise_and_Decline of_Nations/vKxxtjJz—wC>

• Rick Perlstein (2001): Before the Storm: Barry Goldwater & the Unmaking of the American 
Con5en5M5<https://www.google.com/books/edition/Before_the_Storm/6jb9AgAAQBAJ>

•  Rick Perlstein (2008): Nixonland: The Rise of a President & the Fracturing of America<h\.\ps'. 
//www.google .com/books/edition/Nixonland/dM enW zoghoC>

• Noah Smith: America's Scarcity Mindset: Is Our Society Turning into a Zero-Sum Competition for 
SMmvflZ?<https://noahpinion.substack.com/p/americas-scarcity-mindset>

• Lester Thurow (1980): The Zero-Sum Society: Distribution & the Possibilities for 
CAa/zge<https://www.google.com/books/edition/The Zero Sum Society/V5uBbTOzYOAC>

•  Frederick Jackson Turner (1893): The Significance of the Frontier in American History 
<https://www.historians.org/about-aha-and-membership/aha-historv-and-archives/historical-archives/th
e-significance-of-
the-frontier-in-american-history-(1893)>

• Robert Allen: Global Economic History: A Very Short Introduction 
<https://www.amazon.com/Global-Economic-Historv-Introduction-Introductions-ebook/dp/B005JC0QNA/>

• Manfred Steger & Ravi Roy: Neoliberalism: A Very Short Introduction 
<https://www.amazon.com/Neoliberalism-Verv-Short-Introduction-Introductions-dp-0198849672/>

• Manfred Steger: Globalization: A Very Short Introduction 
<https://www.amazon.com/Globalization-Verv-Short-Introduction-Introductions-ebook/dp/B0851PBT5X/>

• Mark Dodgson & David Gann: Innovation: A Very Short Introduction 
<https://www.amazon.com/Innovation-Verv-Short-Introduction-Introductions/dp/0198825048/>

• Ian Goldin: Development: A Very Short Introduction 
<https://www.amazon.com/Development-Verv-Short-Introduction-Introductions-ebook/dp/B077TNZM12/>

• Partha Dasgupta: Economics: A Very Short Introduction 
<https://www.amazon.com/Economics-Verv-Short-Introduction-Introductions-ebook/dp/B00QSEI7Q2/>

• Milton Friedman & Rose Director Friedman: Free to Choose: A Personal Statement 
<https://www.amazon.com/Free-Choose-Statement-Milton-Friedman-ebook/dp/B0Q4MYFLBS/>

• Robert Skidelsky: Keynes: A Very Short Introduction 
<https://www.amazon.com/Keynes-Short-Introduction-Robert-Skidelsky/dp/O199591644/>

• Gareth Dale: Karl Polanyi: The Limits of the Market 
<https://www.amazon.com/Karl-Polanyi-Limits-Gareth-Dale/dp/0745640729/>

• James Fulcher: Capitalism: A Very Short Introduction 
<https://www.amazon.eom/Capitalism-Verv-Short-Introduction-Introductions-ebook/dp/BOOWHMUMLG/>

•  Sheri Berman: The Primacy of Politics: Social Democracy and the Making ofEuropea€™s Twentieth 
Cezary <https://www.amazon.com/Primacy-Politics-Democracy-Europes-Twentieth-
ebook/dp/B0014CBUPM/ref=tmm kin swatch 0? encoding=UTF8&qid=1623861165&sr=8-13>

• Robert C. Allen: The Industrial Revolution: A Very Short Introduction 
<https://www.amazon.com/Industrial-Revolution-Short-Introduction-Introductions-ebook/dp/B06VWNMPN5/>


• David Blockley: Engineering: A Very Short Introduction 
<https://www.amazon.com/Engineering-Short-Introduction-David-Blockley/dp/0199578699/>

• Barra: United States Equity Version 3 (E3) <http://www.alacra.com/alacra/help/barra handbook 
US.pdf>

• Alex Williams: Center for Veb Account Research Newsletter 
<https://vebaccount.substack.com/people/3060Q68-alex>

•  A16Z: FutureaC” Understand the Future, How Tech Shapes It, and How We Build It <https://future 
.a 16z.com/?

mkt tok=MzgyLUpaQi03OTgAAAF9rvBEiElpyS02JPLfvLJBoJpdIaMJL3pfEk34MnCWQHXBwXqs71-5xhPsnP-bR0K2MwrC 
wZjln6-abRg I5nqZG-5NCDgW3r4oPbS48>

• Jason Forrest: Exploring the Craft and Design of WEE. Du Boisa€™ Data       
<https://medium.com/nightingale/exploring-the-craft-and-design-of-w-e-b-du-bois-data-visualizations-
part-3-
b!10d034fd36>

Paragraphs:

As Perry Miller wrote, the New England Puritan settlement had two ideological modes: a€oeGod has 
saved usa€D and a€oeGod has guided us here to do his worka€D. Here we have my ancestor William 
Bradford very
much pushing the first:

William Bradford: History of Plymouth Plantation (1647)'. a€~May not and ought not the children of 
these fathers rightly say: Our fathers were English men which came over this great ocean, and
were ready to perish in this willdernes, but they cried unto the Lord, and he heard their voice, 
and looked on their adversity, etc. Let them therefore praise the Lord, because he is good, and his 
mercies
endure for ever. Yea, let them which have been redeemed of the Lord, show how he hath delivered 
them from the hand of the oppressor. When they wandered in the deserte [and] willdernes out of the
way, and found no citie to dwell in, both hungrie, and thirstie, their soul was overwhelmed in 
them. Let them confess before the Lord his loving kindnes, and his wonderfull works before the sons 
of
mena€!

LINK: <http://www.swarthmore .edu/SocSci/bdorsey 1/41 docs/14-bra.html>

A nice leaning-in from the very sharp Jennifer Doleac:

Noah Smith: The Terrific Triviality of Twitter. a€~Twitter strikes fear into the heart of millions. 
But how much real power does it have?a€! Jennifer Doleac: "I have now been cancelled several times
and if anything gained followers in the processa€”so for better or worse am not afraid to share my 
thoughts with ya€™ alla€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/the-terrific-triviality-of-twitter>


• jason r or rest: exploring me rraji ana uesign oj w.r.o. uu Boisa&* uata 
wsM6mzanon.s'<niips://meaium.com/nigniingaie/expioring-ine-craii-ana-aesign-oi-w-e-D-au-Dois-aaia-vi
suaiizaiions-pan-.3-

bll0d034fd36>

Paragraphs:

As Perry Miller wrote, the New England Puritan settlement had two ideological modes: a€oeGod has 
saved usa€D and a€oeGod has guided us here to do his worka€D. Here we have my ancestor William 
Bradford very
much pushing the first:

William Bradford: History of Plymouth Plantation (1647)'. a€~May not and ought not the children of 
these fathers rightly say: Our fathers were English men which came over this great ocean, and
were ready to perish in this willdernes, but they cried unto the Lord, and he heard their voice, 
and looked on their adversity, etc. Let them therefore praise the Lord, because he is good, and his 
mercies
endure for ever. Yea, let them which have been redeemed of the Lord, show how he hath delivered 
them from the hand of the oppressor. When they wandered in the deserte [and] willdernes out of the
way, and found no citie to dwell in, both hungrie, and thirstie, their soul was overwhelmed in 
them. Let them confess before the Lord his loving kindnes, and his wonderfull works before the sons 
of
mena€!

LINK: <http://www.swarthmore .edu/SocSci/bdorsey 1/41 docs/14-bra.html>

A nice leaning-in from the very sharp Jennifer Doleac:

Noah Smith: The Terrific Triviality of Twitter. a€~Twitter strikes fear into the heart of millions. 
But how much real power does it have?a€! Jennifer Doleac: "I have now been cancelled several times
and if anything gained followers in the processa€”so for better or worse am not afraid to share my 
thoughts with ya€™ alla€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/the-terrific-triviality-of-twittei>

MO AR chemistry phase-change analogies, metaphors, and models for economics, please!

Anton Howes: Honours for Innovators'. a€~As regular readers will know, my main thesis about the 
causes of Britaina€™ s acceleration of innovation in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries is
that its inventors did so much to evangelise for innovation, to spread it further. Innovation is a 
mentality, of constantly perfecting and optimising everything and anything around us, and it spreads
from person to person. But there was nothing special about Britain in having people with the 
improving mentality. There was no uniquely British disposition, or national culture of innovation,
whatever that is (bizarrely, Ia€™m occasionally cited as saying as much). Far from it. A 
disproportionate number of the inventors of the period were immigrants, and I think the improving 
mentality
arrived from abroad anyway, in the mid-sixteenth century. What made Britain special was that the 
improving mentality became especially viral there. Inventors in Britain, initially by accident, and
increasingly on purpose, were especially good at organising themselves into innovation-promoting 
societies, creating norms for the sharing of inventions, lobbying elites for funding, or to pass 
laws
that favoured innovation, and finding ways to raise the social status of being an inventor. The 
cause of Britaina€™ s acceleration of innovation was the success of its innovation evangelists a€”
usually inventors themselves, with a fair few non-inventors cheering from the side-lines tooa€!

LINK: <https ://antonhowes .substack .com/p/age-of-invention-honours-for-innovators>

Time to start heavily penalizing and surtaxing states that are NIMBYist, IMHO:

Will Wilkinson: NIMBYism & the Externalities of Non-Development'. a€™ Ita€™ s conventional wisdom 
that land use regulation, like zoning, is a a€oelocal issue.a€D It isna€™ t, reallya€!. Crazy
regional variation in housing costs undermines the effectiveness of federal monetary and fiscal 
policy, compounding the massive macroeconomic cost of our systemic, zoning-driven misallocation of
labor. Moreover, restrictive zoning in Americaa€™ s superstar cities effectively subsidizes the 
growth of hotter, more sprawling (but less productive) runner-up cities, such as Phoenix and Austin,
increasing greenhouse gas emissions and climate risk thanks to their heavy reliance on air 
conditioners and cars. All of which is to say, the fact that zoninga€™ s locus of control tends to 
be local
doesna€™  t mean that ita€™ s a a€oelocal issue ,a€D This is important to emphasize because the 
most promising path to the amelioration of our deepening housing affordability crisis involves a
rebalancing                                                                                         
  of authority over land use regulation in the direction of state and even federal governmental

LINK: <https://modelcitizen.substack.com/p/nimbyism-and-the-externalities-of>

Very funny. & very true:

Ed Zitron: The Remote Debate Shows The Brittle State of Modern Management'. a€™ A fairly large 
cadre of people that take deep, painful offense at the suggestion that middle management isna€™ t
necessarya€!. The problem is that (as I previously reflected upon) modern corporations have tied 
management to career progression without judging leaders based on the success of their team. In a
functional management system, if a team is failing the manager is the one whose ass is on the 
linea€! There are many managers who cana€™ t manage, and there are many jobs that dona€™ t require
managers at alla€!. The irony of many executives banging on about how we a€oemust return to the 
officea€D is that theya€™re definitely people whoa€™ ve talked about how you need to be a
a€oeself-starter.a€na€! The reason that shitty managers are so common is that theya€! do not have 
enough shit to doa€’’management that actually needs to exist generally has enough on their plate

that they cana€™ t micro-manage, and indeed wona€™ t do so because they trust the people they a€™ 
re managing. And when therea€™ s a mistake? They own that mistake, as the buck stops with
thema€!. Workplace culture has grown into a monster that creates servitude over loyalty, and 
thata€™ s why so many companies are terrified to let people stay remotea€!

LINK: <https://ez.substack.eom/p/the-remote-debate-shows-the-brittle>

Ah. So that is where this comes from. But when and how does a€oeBefore Timea€D shift to a€oeBefore 
Timesa€D?:

Ben Zimmer: a€~The Before Timea€™: A Sci-Fi Idea That Has Made Its Way to Real Life'. a€~We likely 
owe the a€oeBefore Timea€D label to an episode of the original a€oeStar Treka€D series
broadcast in 1966, in which the crew of the Enterprise encounter a planet populated by children who 
survived a man-made plague. A young girl name Miri (whose name also serves as the title of the
episode) explains how the planeta€™ s grown-ups, known as a€ceGrups,a€D disappeared: a€oeThat was 
when they started to get sick in the Before Time. We hid, then they were gone.a€D In 2000,
an episode of a€oeSouth Parka€D parodying a€oeStar Treka€D repopularized the expression, with lines 
like, a€oeThat was in the Before Time, in the Long Long Ago.a€Ua€! Thea€! trope makes it
feel like wea€™re living through our own post-apocalyptic science-fiction plotlinea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-before-time-a-sci-fi-idea-that-has-made-its-wav-to-real-life-11592
580133>

I hope I have time to make one of these this summer for my fall course:

Chris Holdgraf: Announcing the New Jupyter Book'. a€~Jupyter Book is an open source project for 
building beautiful, publication-quality books, websites, and documents from source material that
contains computational content. With this post, wea€™re happy to announce that Jupyter Book has 
been re-written from the ground up, making it easier to install, faster to use, and able to create
more complex publishing content in your books. It is now supported by the Executable Book Project, 
an open community that builds open source tools for interactive and executable documents in the
Jupyter ecosystem and beyonda€!

LINK: <https://blog.jupyter.org/announcing-the-new-jupyter-book-cbf7aa8bc72e>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

