Subscribe now

First:

Brad DeLong: Network for a New Political Economy Teaching Panel: 2021-30-05:

Selections: What are we doing when we do political economy ?a€!

Political economy is social theory ina€! this [Modern Economic Growth Age of the] extraordinary 
transformation of technology, understood as human powers to transform naturea€”not always in a good 
waya€”and to organize humansa€”not always in a good way at all. It is not that economists or 
political scientists have any special expertise in figuring out what the social theory for this age 
of extraordinary
transformation of technology is. I was having a discussion with two other economist [in which]a€!. 
Ia€! Noaha€! Arina€! found thata€! [we had all] been profoundly influenceda€! by the course[s 
we]a€! took from Mark Granovettera€!.

Should we follow the Barrington Moore model? Should we, as Allen strongly advocates, make our 
students read big, difficult books?a€l. We do have to, in some sense, pick some theorists, and then 
show how we apply their theoriesa€”or rather theories and conceptual approaches that are named 
after thema€”to the elements of the real world that we want to studya€!. I for one, continue to be 
very, very impressed


Under the auspices ofN2PE: Network for a New Political Economy: 
<https://twitter.eom/N2PE_Network/status/1367943000639242241xhttps://newpoliticaleconomy.berkeley.ed
u>. Whole thing at: 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/nnpe-teaching-panel-2021-03-05.txt>

Share

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Gavin Wright, Shari Eli, Jonathan Levy, Trevon Logan, Suresh Naidu, & Caitlin Rosenthal: 
Historians and Economic Historians in 
Coziversarion<https:ZZeconfip.orgZhistorians-and-economic-historians-in-conversationZ>

•  George Pearkes: a€™ Core CPI a staggering 1.2% annualized in February, 0.7% annualized over the 
last three months, 1.2%% annualized over the last six months, and a terrifying 1.3% YoY_ 
chttps://twitter.com/pearkes/status/1369642463569281029>

•  Patrick Wyman: Uruk and the Emergence of Civilization: a€~a€oeFemale slave of foreign origin.a€D 
a€oeCaptive malea€Da€! LINK: 
<https://patrickwyman.substack.com/pZuruk-and-the-emergence-of-civilization>

• Scott Lemieux: Let Us Now Praise Famous Yuppies: a€~Bari Weiss: a€oeThe dissidents use pseudonyms 
and turn off their videosa€!. They say that they could face profound repercussions if anyone knew 
they were talkinga€!. These are the rebels: well-off Los Angeles parents who send their children to 
Harvard-Westlake, the most prestigious private school in the citya€!a€D Katharine
Trendacosta: a€™Ia€™ m dying I went to this school. Once in a discussion about affirmative action, 
a kid said he would always prefer to hire other white people. Once in a debate about flag burning, 
a white kid said hea€™ d like to set on fire flag burnersa€! LINK: 
<https:ZZwww.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.comZ2021Z03Zlet-us-now-praise-famous-yuppies>

•  Amit Gandhi: a€™Ihave a vivid memory of sitting in Gary Chamberlaina€™ s econometrics course 
when he said a€oeomitted variable bias is the most important formula in econometricsaCD. 
a€oeSimpsona€™ s paradoxa€D (which I finally looked up) is omitted variable bias with a discrete 
RHS variable. wowa€l LINK: <https:ZZtwitter.comZAmitEconZstatusZl 368990015536119813>

Six Paragraphs:

Frances Coppola: The Dismal Decade: a€~It has become taboo to say, or even imply, that the Brexit 
vote of 2016 was in any way negative for the UK economy. If the Bank of England governor had dared 
to say openly that the primary reason for four years of stagnation prior to the Covida€“19 shock 
was investment collapse due to Brexit, he would have been accused of making political statements. 
But it is the
truth. Herea€™ s the evidence from Baileya€™ s speech:


Chart 5: Real business investment

4-quarter growth
Penod averages

4-quarter growth

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%

-5%

-10%

-15%

-20%

-25%

-30%

AAAA           onnn              AA4r     AA4O


2000      2003     2006     2009     2012     2015      2018

Source: Office for National Statistics and Bank calculations

LINK: <https://www.coppolacomment.com/2021/03/the-dismal-decade.html>

Martin Arnold: UK-EU Trade Falls Sharply as Brexit Disruption Starts to Bite: a€~Latest British 
export-import data from French customs office mirror declines recorded in Germany and Italy: French 
exports to the UK were down 13 per cent in January compared with the average of the previous six 
months, while French imports from the UK fell 20 per cent, according to the French customs office. 
a€oeTrade
with Britain is disrupted due to Brexit,a€D it saida€!. The frictional barriers and uncertainty 
created by Brexit have dealt a heavy blow to commercial activity between the UK and the EU, its 
biggest trading partnera€! higher shipping costs, transportation delays, health certificate 
requirements and more complex customs requirements at the bordera€!. German exports to Britain in 
January were down about 30 per
cent year on yeara€!. Italy last month reported a 38 per cent year-on-year drop in exports to the 
UK and a 70 per cent drop in British imports in Januarya€!. Gabriel Felbermayr, president of the 
Kiel Institute for the World Economy, said research it did for the German government found the 
countrya€™ s exports to the UK were likely to remain 12a€“15 per cent below pre-Brexit levelsa€! 
LINK:

<https://www.ft.com/content/5b8028a7-edaf-4488-8e96-3761ba8b015f>

Tracy Lightcap: On Lincolna€™ s Cooper Union Address: a€~The Cooper Union speech is the best 
example we have of Lincoln in full campaign attack mode. It starts with a lawyera€™ s direction of 
arguments for and against forbidding slavery in the territories and seems rather dry. But you have 
to remember that Lincolna€™ s audience wanted that; he was playing to their foregone conclusions 
and showing
that there was support for them and that, if he was president, he would act accordingly. Then he 
starts in on the political arguments. Here Lincoln is swinging right and left hooks from his waist 
and he lands every single time. We dona€™ t see that in his presidential speeches; hea€™ s all 
reconciliation and reunification and leta€™ s make freedom ring in those. At Cooper Union he was 
out for blood and he drew it
every time. I always assigned this speech in my classes in our junior multi-disciplinary course, 
just so the students could get a flavor of just how good Lincoln was on the stump. And that was 
really, really gooda€!

LINK: <https://www.bradford-delong.eom/2021/03/reading-abraham-lincoln- 
1860-02-27-cooper-union-address.html?cid=6a00e551f080038834027880199611200d#comment-6a00e551f0800388
34027880199611200d>

Austin Clemens: New Great Recession Data Suggest Congress Should Go Big: a€~Joe Bidena€™ s proposed 
$1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan, critics now argue that it will a€ceovershoota€Da€!. 
Undershooting the policy response would be a far more dangerous prospect and could lead to a repeat 
of the slow and inequitable economic growth that followed the previous U.S. recessiona€!. A new 
data series
from the U.S. Department of Commercea€™ s Bureau of Economic Analysisa€”its Distribution of 
Personal Income seriesa€’’shows just how devastating this pattern was for most U.S. workers and 
their familiesa€!. In the bottom 50 percenta€! because disposable personal income incorporates 
transfers from the federal government to households, so losses in this group were partially 
compensated for by rising
Unemployment Insurance payments, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program benefits, and other 
government benefits. But this group then became mired in years of stagnant, or even declining, 
income as these benefits ended amid a still-tepid economic recovery, and did not experience 
substantial income gains until 2015. By comparison, households in the top 10 percent of income 
recovered almost
immediately    after the end of the Great Recession and ended 2018 up 22 percent compared to 
2007a€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/new-great-recession-data-suggest-congress-should-go-big-to-spur-a-broad
-based-sustained-u-s-economic-recovery/>

Kathryn Gehren: About Hum. Servt: a€~Women in the 18th and early 19th century wrote about all sorts 
of things. They discussed health, family news, gossip, courtship, and much more. However, while 
most historians love to find a letter that describes George Washingtona€™ s granddaughter teaching 
her pet parrot to sing along with her harpsichord, they might not be able to find a place to quote 
it in their
research article. This podcast is an attempt to showcase these letters in a fun and informative 
waya€!. Each episode features one letter to or from a woman from the 18th or early 19th century. 
Host Kathryn Gehred uses her training in history and documentary editing to dig up the story behind 
each letter. She spends a little time setting up the context before reading the letter in full. She 
and a guest then dig into the
details, discussing what makes this document interesting, and what it can tell us about its timea€!

LINK: <https://humservt.com/about-your-host/>

Ryan Mac & Craig Silverman: Joel Kaplana€™ s Policy Team Sways Big Facebook Decisions Like Alex 
Jones Ban: a€~a€oeMark Changed The Rulesa€D: How Facebook Went Easy On Alex Jones And Other 
Right-Wing Figures: Facebooka€™ s rules to combat misinformation and hate speech are subject to the 
whims and political considerations of its CEO and his policy team leader: In April 2019,
Facebook was preparing to ban one of the interneta€™ s most notorious spreaders of misinformation 
and hate, Infowars founder Alex Jones. Then CEO Mark Zuckerberg personally intervened. Jones had 
gained infamy for claiming that the 2012 Sandy Hook elementary school massacre was a a€oegiant 
hoax,a€D and that the teenage survivors of the 2018 Parkland shooting were a€oecrisis actors.a€D But
Facebook  had found that he was also relentlessly spreading hate against various groups, including 
Muslims and trans people. That behavior qualified him for expulsion from the social network under 
the companya€™ s policies for a€oedangerous individuals and organizations,a€U which required 
Facebook to also remove any content that expressed a€oepraise or supporta€D for them. But 
Zuckerberg didna€™ t
consider the Infowars founder to be a hate figure, according to a person familiar with the 
decision, so he overruled his own internal experts and opened a gaping loophole: Facebook would 
permanently ban Jones and his company a€” but would not touch posts of praise and support for them 
from other Facebook users. This meant that Jonesa€™ legions of followers could continue to share 
his lies across the
worlda€™  s largest social networka€!

LINK: 
<https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/rvanmac/mark-zuckerberg-joel-kaplan-facebook-alex-jones>

