First, read & think about:

Schuman may well be right. But he also may well be wrong here:

Michael Schuman: The Undoing of Chinaa€™ s Economic Miracle: a€~Regulators squelcheda€! [Jack] 
Maa€™ s fintech giant, Ant Group, a mere two days before its November debut on the Shanghai and 
Hong Kong Stock Exchangesa€! widespread concern that Chinese authorities were punishing Ma for 
criticizing their oversight of the finance industrya€!. Jerome Cohena€! a€oea new central campaign 
to curb the political and
economic power of major private entrepreneurs who refuse to follow the central Party line in every 
respect.a€Ua€! Though Xi has occasionally implemented market reformsa€! [but] overalla€! has shown 
a preference for the very visible hand of the statea€! financial aid to a wide range of high-tech 
industries, including microchips and electric carsa€!.a€oedual circulationa€Da€! self-sufficiency 
a€ [especially [in] microchips and other
critical technologiesa€!. Xi is preparing for protracted conflict between the worlda€™ s two 
largest economies by attempting to fireproof China from measures President-elect Joe Biden might 
use against hima€! LINK: 
chttps://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2021/01/xi-jinping-china-economy-jack-ma/617552/?
=>

I see Xi as seeking to protect himself and his rA©gime against three threats:

1. Pressure applied from a€oethe westa€D via weaponized interdependence.

2. Billionaires who become independent political actors as a bourgeoisie.

3. The complete corruption of the party that would turn it into a parasitic class without a 
credible societal rolea€”and, eventually, perhaps trigger a revolution.

Remember that Xi, at some level, believes Marxism. He does not believe in rule by the bourgeoisie. 
He does not believe in rule bya€”as so often has been the case in Chinaa€™ s historya€”a parasitic 
bureaucratic aristocracy. He wants to see China ruled by a Communist Party that carries the banner 
of utopia, whatever that turns out to be, into the future.

And he wants to be the boss. And once he is the boss, it is very hard to step down: emperors tend 
to turn into emperors for life, anda€”this will be Chinaa€™ s problem of Xi succeeds in his 
entrenchmenta€’’humans have little experience with the problems of imperials succession in an age 
of modern medicine extending life expectancy well past the age major cognitive decline begins.

And now:

Subscribe now

Very Briefly Noted:

• Ancient Coins Forum: Buying Power of Ancient Coins 
<https://www.forumancientcoins.com/dougsmith/worth.html>

• John Maynard Keynes (1942): How Much Does Finance Matter 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/article-keynes-finance-matter.pdf>

• David Kessler & Peter Temin: Money & Prices in the Early Roman Empire 
<https://dspace.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/1721.1/63816/moneypricesinearOOkess,pdf>

•  Scott Lemieux: Seditionist Commits Kinsleyan Gaffe: a€~Even a bullshit artisan as well-practiced 
as Virginia via Missouri a€cepopulista€D Stanford Yale Hawley Esq. can only keep up the facade for 
so long:


3     . The complete corruption of the party that would turn it into a parasitic class without a 
credible societal rolea€”and, eventually, perhaps trigger a revolution.

Remember that Xi, at some level, believes Marxism. He does not believe in rule by the bourgeoisie. 
He does not believe in rule bya€”as so often has been the case in Chinaa€™ s historya€”a parasitic 
bureaucratic aristocracy. He wants to see China ruled by a Communist Party that carries the banner 
of utopia, whatever that turns out to be, into the future.

And he wants to be the boss. And once he is the boss, it is very hard to step down: emperors tend 
to turn into emperors for life, anda€”this will be Chinaa€™ s problem of Xi succeeds in his 
entrenchmenta€’’humans have little experience with the problems of imperials succession in an age 
of modern medicine extending life expectancy well past the age major cognitive decline begins.

And now:

Subscribe now

Very Briefly Noted:

• Ancient Coins Forum: Buying Power of Ancient Coins <https ://www.forumancientcoins 
.com/dougsmith/worth .html>

• John Maynard Keynes (1942): How Much Does Finance Matter 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/article-keynes-finance-matter.pdf>

• David Kessler & Peter Temin: Money & Prices in the Early Roman Empire 
<https://dspace.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/1721.1/63816/moneypricesinear00kess.pdf>

•  Scott Lemieux: Seditionist Commits Kinsleyan Gaffe: a€~Even a bullshit artisan as well-practiced 
as Virginia via Missouri a€cepopulista€D Stanford Yale Hawley Esq. can only keep up the facade for 
so long:

Ryan Grim @ryangrim

Hawley in this interviews slips at one moment and says of his claims of a fraudulent election, 
a€oel didna€™ t mislead anybody, I was very careful...a€D Catches himself and says he was a€oevery 
explicit ,a€D At about 3:40: https://t.co/OAQzlIajOo

Arthur Delaney @ ArthurDelaneyHP

Hear the sad interview for yourself: https ://t.co/oAF9aVVRmv
3:18 AM F™ Jan 29,2021

3,236Likes799Retweets

<https: //w ww.lawyersgunsmoneyblog .com/2021/01/seditionist-commits-kinsleyan-gaffe>

•  Scott Alexander: Book Review: a€~Julian Jaynesa€™T/ze Origin Of Consciousness In The Breakdown 
Of The Bicameral Mind is a brilliant book, with only two minor flaws. First, that it purports to 
explains the origin of consciousness. And second, that it posits a breakdown of the bicameral mind. 
I think ita€™ s possible to route around these flaws while keeping the thesis otherwise intacta€! 
LINK: https: //slatestarcodex .com/2020/06/01/book-
review-origin-of-consciousness-in-the-breakdown-of-the-bicameral-mind/

Share

Six Paragraphs:

Dan Froomkin: What the next generation of editors need to tell their political reporters I Press 
Watch: a€~Ia€™ ve written a speech for the next boss to give to their political staffs. It goes 
like thisa€!. Hi! Ita€™ s so nice to be herea€!. Ita€™ s impossible to look out on the current 
state of political discourse in this country and think that we are succeeding in our core mission 
of creating an informed electorate. Ita€™ s impossible to look out at the looming and
in some cases existential challengesa€! and think that ita€™ s OK for us to just keep doing what 
wea€™ ve been doing. So let me tell you a bit about what we need to do differentlya€! LINK: 
https://presswatchers.org/2021/01/what-the-next-generation-of-editors-need-to-tell-their-political-r
eporters/

Kiona Smith: This Is How Hominins Adapted to a Changing World 2 Million Years 
Agohttps://arstechnica.com/science/2021/01/this-is-how-hominins-adapted-to-a-changing-world-2-millio
n-years-ago/: a€~Jacks of all trades: And even if the earliest hunters and gatherers at Ewass 
Oldupa would have found later versions of the place totally alien, they would still have recognized 
the tools people used to survive it. For roughly 200,000 years, hominins relied on
the same basic tools to tackle the bracken meadows beside the river, the patchwork of woods and 
grassland, the lush lakeshore, and the dry steppe. The chopping, scraping, and pounding tools of 
the Olduwan were relatively simple, but they were also incredibly versatile. According to Petraglia 
and his colleagues, Olduwan technology offered a basic, general toolkit that worked as well in a 
lakeside palm grove as it did on a dry steppe. Humans took over the world
because wea€™re generalists, and generalists can adapt to nearly anything. Our early relatives 
clearly had the same advantagea€!

Jamie Powell: The EV Bubble Spreadsheet: Update Dos: a€~Just gawp at the aggregate figures in FT 
Alphavillea€™ s proprietary EV bubble Google Sheet, which we launched a fortnight or so ago. Our 
favourite ridiculous metric at the moment? BMWa€™ s research and development spend in 2019 is 
almost double what every electric vehicle stock is expected to spend in 2020. Which somewhat 
dampens the idea that this particular market bubble will have
positive spillover effects in the real economy. So whata€™ s new in the sheet this week? Well, in 
terms of stocks, wea€™ ve added much hyped electric vehicle maker Faraday Futurea€! LINK: 
https://www.ft.com/content/9d877b55-a0f9-47b9-bc8a-7d7bd36a03f8

Steve M.: How Republicans Think & How Democrats Think: a€~Democrats have learneda€! that ita€™ s 
dangerous to let a crazy, angry extremist become the face of the GOP because therea€™ s no reason 
to believe that the Republican electoratea€! will reject crazy, angry extremism. Ita€™ s just the 
opposite, in facta€’’Republicans love Trump and Greene, and while Trump-like figures might never 
win majority support nationwide, Republicans dona€™ t
need majorities to seize control. During the Obama years, Republicans accused the president and 
members of his administration (Hillary Clinton, Susan Rice) of malfeasance, but they never 
seriously tried to punish them. Democrats, by contrast, have (futilely) impeached Donald Trump 
twice. Democrats arena€™t faking outrage, the way Republicans have against Barack Obama, Hillary 
Clinton, and Joe Biden. Democrats genuinely believe that people like
Trump and Greene are dangerous. Given the choice of making them examples or ridding the country of 
the threat they pose, Democrats will choose the lattera€! LINK: 
https://nomoremister.blogspot.com/2021/02/how-republicans-think-and-how-democrats.html

Sam Arbesman: Reinventing Book Publishing in the Tech 
WorZ6Zhttps://arbesman.substack.com/p/-reinventing-publishing-in-the-tech: a€~attempts to 
constantly reexamine and reinvent the democratization, distribution, and furthering of knowledge 
should be watched closely (and please let me know of other examples you are aware of!). For 
ultimately, publishers are catalysts of world-changing ideasa€!

Gerard Baker (2020a€“lla€“16): Four Seasons Total Landscaping Isna€™ t Exactly the Reichstag 
https://www.wsj 
.com/articles/four-seasons-total-landscaping-isnt-exactly-the-reichstag-11605545752: a€~Trumpa€™ s 
shambolic vote challenges provoke cries of a€cecoupa€D and the usual comparisons to Hitlera€!
Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Plus:

The Context of John Stuart Milla€™s: a€oeHitherto It Is Questionable If All the Mechanical 
Inventions Yet Made Have Lightened the Daya€™s Toil of Any Human Beinga€D

In the Ashley edition that has been standard sincea€! 1909,1 believe, the end of Book IV, Chapter 
6, a€oeOf the Stationary Statea€D of John Stuart Milla€™ s Principles of Political Economy with 
Some of Their Applications to Social Philosophy reads:

Of the Stationary State: Hitherto [1848] it is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet 
made have lightened the daya€™ s toil of any human being. They have enabled a greater population to 
live the same life of drudgery and imprisonment, and an increased number of manufacturers and 
others to make fortunes. They have increased the comforts of the middle classes. But they have not 
yet begun to effect those great changes in
human destiny, which it is in their nature and in their futurity to accomplish. Only when, in 
addition to just institutions, the increase of mankind shall be under the deliberate guidance of 
judicious foresight, can the conquests made from the powers of nature by the intellect and energy 
of scientific discoverers, become the common property of the species, and the means of improving 
and elevating the universal lot.

The a€ce[1848]a€D in square brackets was added by W.J. Ashley in 1909 to indicate that that that 
first sentence, with its a€oeHitherto,a€n had been in the book since its first 1848 edition. 
Milla€™ s time references, Ashley explained, were:

occasionally a little bewildering: a a€cenowa€D in his text may mean any time between 1848 and 
1871. In every case where it seemed necessary to ascertain and to remind the reader of the time 
when a particular sentence was written, I have inserted the date in the text in square bracketsa€!

Political Economy came out in seven editions: 1848,1849,1852,1857,1862,1865, and 1871. In none of 
them did Mill himself think that it was worth changing a€oehithertoa€D to a€oeformerly.a€n
LINK: https://www.bradford-delong.com/2008/Q5/hitherto-it-is.html


ut tne stationary state: Hitnerto [i»4»j it is questionable it an tne mecnanicai inventions yet 
made nave ngntenea tne aaya^1™ s ton ot any numan being, iney nave enabled a greater population to 
live tne same me ot drudgery and imprisonment, and an increased number ot manuiacturers and otners 
to make rortunes. iney nave increased tne comiorts ot tne middle classes. But tney nave not yet 
begun to enect tnose great cnanges in

human destiny, which it is in their nature and in their futurity to accomplish. Only when, in 
addition to just institutions, the increase of mankind shall be under the deliberate guidance of 
judicious foresight, can the conquests made from the powers of nature by the intellect and energy 
of scientific discoverers, become the common property of the species, and the means of improving 
and elevating the universal lot.

The a€ce[1848]a€C in square brackets was added by W.J. Ashley in 1909 to indicate that that that 
first sentence, with its a€oeHitherto,a€n had been in the book since its first 1848 edition. 
Milla€™ s time references, Ashley explained, were:

occasionally a little bewildering: a a€cenowa€D in his text may mean any time between 1848 and 
1871. In every case where it seemed necessary to ascertain and to remind the reader of the time 
when a particular sentence was written, I have inserted the date in the text in square bracketsa€!

Political Economy came out in seven editions: 1848,1849,1852,1857,1862,1865, and 1871. In none of 
them did Mill himself think that it was worth changing a€oehithertoa€D to a€oeformerly.a€n
LINK: https://www.bradford-delong.com/2008/05/hitherto-it-is.html

