Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

CONDITION: Federal Reserve Nominees:

I have only one complaint: these fill-up-the-FRB nominations are a year late:

Joe Biden: Federal Reserve Nominations'. a€™ Sarah Bloom Raskin to Serve as Vice Chair for 
Supervision of the Federal Reserve, and Lisa Cook and Philip Jefferson to Serve as Governorsa€!. 
Together with Chair Powell and Dr. Brainard, who I renominated last month, this group will bring 
much needed expertise judgement and leadershipa€! continue the important
work                                                                                                
                                                                      of steering us on a path to a 
strong, sustainable recovery, while making sure that price increases do not become entrenched over 
the long terma€!

LINK: 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/01/14/president-biden-nominates-s
arah-bloom-raskin-to-serve-as-vice-chair-for-supervision-of-the-federal-reserve-and-lisa-cook-and-ph
ilip-iefferson-to-serve-as-governors/>

They do face a difficult task right now. As John Maynard Keynes wrote back in 1924: a€oethe 
Governors and Court of the Bank of Englanda€! now and for the future have a much more difficult and 
anxious task entrusted to them than in former daysa€D 
<https://archive.org/details/dli.ernet.16773/mode/1 up>.
Thanks for reading this. And please share it far and wide, if you think it worth reading!

Share

First: Hexapodia XXXIII: Inflation!

Noah Smith put it this way: "Team Transitory has lost, and the Team Transitory members have all 
shifted over to Team The-Fed-Has-Got-Thisa€”which is probably the right view to have of the 
situation.a€D

I would prefer to say: a€oeWe need inflation right nowa€”because our inflation target was too low 
and was undershot, inflation is what we must have to make Saya€™ s Law true in practice and get us 
to full employment, and necessary also to grease the great sectoral rebalancing towards 
goods-produciton now underway. Keeping that inflation transitory is the job of the Federal 
Reservea€”and
right now there is every reason to be confident that the Fed has got this.a€D

We probably should have gotten a third who disagrees more with us on for this topic to make it more 
interesting. But that would probably have made it less informative:


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

PODCAST: "Hexapodia" is AMe Key Insight XXXIII: Inflation!

Listen now (47 min) I Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that 
this Grasping Reality newsletter is a reader-supported publicationa€”I really would like to collect 
enough from it to hire ana€!

Read more

a year ago A- Brad DeLong

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Video:

Liu Thai Ker: The Architectural Mastermind Behind Modern Singapore: chttps: //w w w.ted 
■com/talks/liu_thai_kerthe_architectural_mastermindbehind.modern_singapore>


One Picture:

FRED    ---- 3-Month Treasury Bill Secondary Market Rate

— Market Yield on U.S. Treasury Securities at 10-Year Constant Maturity

---- Market Yield on U.S. Treasury Securities at 10-Year Constant Maturity, Inflation-
Indexed

-  30-year Breakeven Inflation Rate

-2

2002       2004       2006       2008       2010       2012       2014       2016       2018       
2020      2022

The bond market is 100% in a€oethe Federal Reserve has got thisa€D with respect to inflationa€!

Very Briefly Noted:

• William L. Shirer: The Collapse of the Third Republic: An Inquiry into the Fall of France in 
1940<https://archive .org/details/collapseofthirdOO will/mode/1 up? vie w=theater>

• VoxChina: a€~A Bridge on Economic Issues between China and the Worlda€! <http://voxchina.org/>

• John Cassidy: Joe Biden Starts to Make His Economic Case 
<https://www.newvorker.com/news/our-columnists/ioe-biden-starts-to-make-his-economic-case>

• Wikipedia. The City of the Sun: a€~Tommaso Campanellaa€! 1602a€! <https://en .wikipedia 
.org/wiki/The_City_of_the_Sun>

•  Wikipedia: New Atlantis: a€~Published posthumously in 1626a€! tucked into the back of a longer 
work of natural history, Sylva sylvarum^\ <https://en.wikipedia,org/wiki/New_ Atlantis>

• Noah Smith: Yes, Worker Skills Matter


Yes, worker skills matter

The other day, NYC Mayor Eric Adams caused a stir when he said that a€oeMy low-skill workers, my 
cooks, my dishwashers, my messengers, my shoe-shine people, those who work at Dunkina€™ Donuts a€” 
they dona€™t have the academic skills to sit in a corner officea€l
Read more

a year ago A- 49 Ekes A- 53 comments A- Noah Smith

•  Aaron Rupar: Trumpd€™ s Attack on d€ceGutlessd€LJDeSantis is the Opening Salvo of the 2024 GOP 
Primary. a€™ By trying to portray his competition as weak, Trumpa€™ s talking a page out of his 
2016 playbooka€!


Public Notice

Trump's attack on "gutless" DeSantis is the opening salvo of the 2024 GOP primary

Donald Trump just fired the first shot of the 2024 Republican presidential primary. And, in a 
surprising twist, hea€™ s going after the competition by highlighting how a€cegutlessa€D their 
Covid messaging has been. To be clear, Trumpa€™ s attack has less to do with his newfound 
enthusiasm for public health than it does with making others look weak. In that respect, one of the 
first moves of
his likely 2024 campaign is reminiscent of his approach to the 2106 primary, when hea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 10 likes A- Aaron Rupar

• John Holbo (2010): Libertarianism, Property Rights, & Self-Ownership



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

READING: John Holbo (2010): Libertarianism, Property Rights, & Self-Ownership

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”I really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
ana€!

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- 16 comments A- Brad DeLong

• Tom Nichols: a€™In the 92 election I was living in New Hampshire, and thata€™ s when it really 
became clear to me that people think the job of the President of the United States is to find a job 
for a pipefitter in Nashuaa€!

Tom Nichols @RadioFreeTom

@JRubinBlogger In the 92 election I was living in New Hampshire, and that's when it really became 
clear to me that people think the job of the President of the United States is to find a job for a 
pipefitter in Nashua.
3:50 PMT™ Jan 11,2022

297Likes 19Re tweets

Paragraphs:

William H. Janeway: Capital Is Not a Strategy: a€~While entrepreneurs and venture-capital founders 
tell themselves that a€oecapital is a strategy ,a€D bubble finance is no substitute for a business 
plan that can achieve positive cash flowa€!. In the low-friction world of internet-delivered or 
mediated services, start-ups are eager to spend ever-greater amounts of other peoplea€™ s money to
acquire customers, the goal being to emerge victorious in a winner-takes-all racea€!. Occasionally, 
these explosions of investor exuberance have funded the deployment of innovative technologies at 
sufficient scale to transform the market economy, as was the case with railroads, electrification, 
and the internet. Whether a bubble is productive depends on what it leaves behind. But all bubbles
burst,   so even investors in the vehicles of a productive episode inevitably will fall into one of 
two categories: the quick or the deada€!. The managerial sagas of Uber, We Work, and Theranos 
represent the downstream consequences of the flood unleashed by central banks. Theranos founder 
Elizabeth Holmes may be the only one so far to have been caught crossing the line into criminal 
liability as
she pumped and puffed up her company. But the absence of other prosecutions is no excuse for 
investors and board members to abandon their fiduciary responsibilities^!

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/attracting-nontraditional-capital-is-not-a-business-pl
an-bv-william-h-janeway-2022-01>

Mohamed El-Erian: The Key to 2022 Will Be How Inflation Is Brought Down: a€~For more than a decade, 
large-scale central bank purchases of assets boosted not just those being bought in markets but 
also virtually all other assets, be they financial or physical (such as housing, art and other 
collectibles). This was particularly the case in 202la€!. As the new year unfolds, both the Fed and
markets have a huge stake in inflation coming down in an orderly way. But the window of opportunity 
for policy to achieve this is rapidly closing. The alternative is a disorderly drop, which would 
involve the even bigger Fed policy error of having to be too abrupt in tightening monetary policy 
after being way too slow previouslya€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.eom/content/20e0857b-99cb-4495-8677-8746d97db836#myft:mv-news:page>

Robert Armstrong: How to Panic About Inflation: a€~High levels of panic will be appropriate if we 
see sharp acceleration in services prices, especially outside healthcare and transporta€!. This 
would indicate that the strong wage gains we have seen recently are spreading pervasively though 
the economy, in ways that could (in theory) scare everyone into thinking inflation is here to say, 
and
trigger the dreaded wage-price spirala€!. If the Fed gets to its target two per cent rate in 
2023a€”that still means negative short-term ratesa€!. a€oeThat is not going to constrain the cost 
of financing anythinga€Da€!. The Fed might have to get much more hawkish than it is now, with heavy 
consequences for markets. Unhedged is not there yet, because wea€™re just not convinced demand will
be strong for long, and the bond market supports our doubts. But Michelea€™ s argument frightens us 
all the samea€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/04892blb-d977-473d-8b54-d34e33a29703>

Ian King: Intel (INTC) Is Having a Happy New Year So Far, Enjoying 8% Rally: a€~At last weeka€™ s 
CES in Las Vegas, Intel executives said that a new raft of products will put it back on top in the 
computer processor arena. They made the same argument at JPMorgan Chase & Co.a€™ s technology 
confab. And earlier this week, Intel added a new chief financial officer, demonstrating that its
current CEO is now firmly in command of the companya€™ s trajectorya€!. At least some investors are 
willing to listen to Intel Chief Executive Officer Pat Gelsingera€™ s message of renewal after 
nearly a year on the joba€!. Up until this point, Gelsinger has been playing a hand that was dealt 
by earlier executives (whom Intel fired)a€!. Intela€! announced ita€™ s shipping graphics

processors, an attempt to take on Nvidia on its home turf. Intel currently has zero share in the 
lucrative market for the add-in cards loved by gamersa€!
LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-01-12/intel-is-having-a-happy-new-year-so-far?cmpid
=BBD011222 TECH>

Scott Lemieux: When Hea€™ s Right, Hea€™ s Right: a€~As Ia€™ ve said before, the closest thing 
Trump has to a redeeming quality is his relentless humiliation of his most obsequious lickspittles, 
and turning on Americaa€™ s Beloved CO VID Governor he even stumbles into an insult thata€™ s right 
on the merits: a€oeFormer president Donald Trump on Tuesday ripped into politicians


Paragraphs:

William H. Janeway: Capital Is Not a Strategy: a€~While entrepreneurs and venture-capital founders 
tell themselves that a€oecapital is a strategy,a€D bubble finance is no substitute for a business 
plan that can achieve positive cash flowa€l. In the low-friction world of internet-delivered or 
mediated services, start-ups are eager to spend ever-greater amounts of other peoplea€™ s money to
acquire customers, the goal being to emerge victorious in a winner-takes-all racea€!. Occasionally, 
these explosions of investor exuberance have funded the deployment of innovative technologies at 
sufficient scale to transform the market economy, as was the case with railroads, electrification, 
and the internet. Whether a bubble is productive depends on what it leaves behind. But all bubbles
burst,   so even investors in the vehicles of a productive episode inevitably will fall into one of 
two categories: the quick or the deada€!. The managerial sagas of Uber, We Work, and Theranos 
represent the downstream consequences of the flood unleashed by central banks. Theranos founder 
Elizabeth Holmes may be the only one so far to have been caught crossing the line into criminal 
liability as
she pumped and puffed up her company. But the absence of other prosecutions is no excuse for 
investors and board members to abandon their fiduciary responsibilities^!

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-syndicate.org/commentary/attracting-nontraditional-capital-is-not-a-business-pl
an-by-william-h-ianeway-2022-01>

Mohamed El-Erian: The Key to 2022 Will Be How Inflation Is Brought Down: a€~For more than a decade, 
large-scale central bank purchases of assets boosted not just those being bought in markets but 
also virtually all other assets, be they financial or physical (such as housing, art and other 
collectibles). This was particularly the case in 202la€!. As the new year unfolds, both the Fed and
markets have a huge stake in inflation coming down in an orderly way. But the window of opportunity 
for policy to achieve this is rapidly closing. The alternative is a disorderly drop, which would 
involve the even bigger Fed policy error of having to be too abrupt in tightening monetary policy 
after being way too slow previouslya€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.eom/content/20e0857b-99cb-4495-8677-8746d97db836#myft:my-news:page>

Robert Armstrong: How to Panic About Inflation: a€~High levels of panic will be appropriate if we 
see sharp acceleration in services prices, especially outside healthcare and transporta€l. This 
would indicate that the strong wage gains we have seen recently are spreading pervasively though 
the economy, in ways that could (in theory) scare everyone into thinking inflation is here to say, 
and
trigger the dreaded wage-price spirala€!. If the Fed gets to its target two per cent rate in 
2023a€”that still means negative short-term ratesa€!. a€oeThat is not going to constrain the cost 
of financing anythinga€Da€!. The Fed might have to get much more hawkish than it is now, with heavy 
consequences for markets. Unhedged is not there yet, because wea€™re just not convinced demand will
be strong for long, and the bond market supports our doubts. But Michelea€™ s argument frightens us 
all the samea€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/04892blb-d977-473d-8b54-d34e33a297Q3>

Ian King: Intel (INTC) Is Having a Happy New Year So Far, Enjoying 8% Rally: a€~At last weeka€™ s 
CES in Las Vegas, Intel executives said that a new raft of products will put it back on top in the 
computer processor arena. They made the same argument at JPMorgan Chase & Co.a€™ s technology 
confab. And earlier this week, Intel added a new chief financial officer, demonstrating that its
current CEO is now firmly in command of the companya€™ s trajectorya€!. At least some investors are 
willing to listen to Intel Chief Executive Officer Pat Gelsingera€™ s message of renewal after 
nearly a year on the joba€!. Up until this point, Gelsinger has been playing a hand that was dealt 
by earlier executives (whom Intel fired)a€!. Intela€! announced ita€™ s shipping graphics

processors, an attempt to take on Nvidia on its home turf. Intel currently has zero share in the 
lucrative market for the add-in cards loved by gamersa€!
LINK: <https://www.bloomberg 
.com/news/newsletters/2022-01-12/intel-is-having-a-happy-new-vear-so-far?cmpid=BBD011222 TECH>

Scott Lemieux: When Hea€™ s Right, Hea€™ s Right: a€~As Ia€™ ve said before, the closest thing 
Trump has to a redeeming quality is his relentless humiliation of his most obsequious lickspittles, 
and turning on Americaa€™ s Beloved CO VID Governor he even stumbles into an insult thata€™ s right 
on the merits: a€oeFormer president Donald Trump on Tuesday ripped into politicians
who refuse to say if theya€™ ve received a COVIDa€“19 booster shota€”a group that notably includes 
Florida GOP Gov. Ron DeSantis. a€~Ia€™ ve had the boostera€™ , Trump told One America News Network 
in an interview. a€~Many politicians, I watched a couple of politicians be interviewed and one of 
the questions was, a€oeDid you get the booster?a€D Because they had the vaccine,
and theya€™re answering likea€”in other words, the answer is a€ceyesa€D, but they dona€™t want to 
say it, because theya€™re gutless. You gotta say it, whether you had it or not, say it.a€™ a€D One 
advantage of being a cult leader is that it makes you the one Republican who can accidentally tell 
the truth and not see your political career ruined over it.

LINK: <https://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog .com/2Q22/01 /when-hes-right-hes-right-6>
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Give a gift subscription

